Celephaïs

In a dream Kuranes saw the city in the valley, and the sea-coast beyond, and the snowy peak
overlooking the sea, and the gaily painted galleys that sail out of the harbour toward the distant
regions where the sea meets the sky. In a dream it was also that he came by his name of Kuranes,
for when awake he was called by another name. Perhaps it was natural for him to dream a new
name; for he was the last of his family, and alone among the indifferent millions of London,
so there were not many to speak to him and remind him who he had been. His money and lands were
gone, and he did not care for the ways of people about him, but preferred to dream and write
of his dreams. What he wrote was laughed at by those to whom he shewed it, so that after a time
he kept his writings to himself, and finally ceased to write. The more he withdrew from the
world about him, the more wonderful became his dreams; and it would have been quite futile to
try to describe them on paper. Kuranes was not modern, and did not think like others who wrote.
Whilst they strove to strip from life its embroidered robes of myth, and to shew in naked ugliness
the foul thing that is reality, Kuranes sought for beauty alone. When truth and experience failed
to reveal it, he sought it in fancy and illusion, and found it on his very doorstep, amid the
nebulous memories of childhood tales and dreams.
There are not many persons who know what wonders are opened to them in the
stories and visions of their youth; for when as children we listen and dream, we think but half-formed
thoughts, and when as men we try to remember, we are dulled and prosaic with the poison of life.
But some of us awake in the night with strange phantasms of enchanted hills and gardens, of
fountains that sing in the sun, of golden cliffs overhanging murmuring seas, of plains that
stretch down to sleeping cities of bronze and stone, and of shadowy companies of heroes that
ride caparisoned white horses along the edges of thick forests; and then we know that we have
looked back through the ivory gates into that world of wonder which was ours before we were
wise and unhappy.
Kuranes came very suddenly upon his old world of childhood. He had been dreaming
of the house where he was born; the great stone house covered with ivy, where thirteen generations
of his ancestors had lived, and where he had hoped to die. It was moonlight, and he had stolen
out into the fragrant summer night, through the gardens, down the terraces, past the great oaks
of the park, and along the long white road to the village. The village seemed very old, eaten
away at the edge like the moon which had commenced to wane, and Kuranes wondered whether the
peaked roofs of the small houses hid sleep or death. In the streets were spears of long grass,
and the window-panes on either side were either broken or filmily staring. Kuranes had not lingered,
but had plodded on as though summoned toward some goal. He dared not disobey the summons for
fear it might prove an illusion like the urges and aspirations of waking life, which do not
lead to any goal. Then he had been drawn down a lane that led off from the village street toward
the channel cliffs, and had come to the end of things—to the precipice and the abyss where
all the village and all the world fell abruptly into the unechoing emptiness of infinity, and
where even the sky ahead was empty and unlit by the crumbling moon and the peering stars. Faith
had urged him on, over the precipice and into the gulf, where he had floated down, down, down;
past dark, shapeless, undreamed dreams, faintly glowing spheres that may have been partly dreamed
dreams, and laughing winged things that seemed to mock the dreamers of all the worlds. Then
a rift seemed to open in the darkness before him, and he saw the city of the valley, glistening
radiantly far, far below, with a background of sea and sky, and a snow-capped mountain near
the shore.
Kuranes had awaked the very moment he beheld the city, yet he knew from his
brief glance that it was none other than Celephaïs, in the Valley of Ooth-Nargai beyond
the Tanarian Hills, where his spirit had dwelt all the eternity of an hour one summer afternoon
very long ago, when he had slipt away from his nurse and let the warm sea-breeze lull him to
sleep as he watched the clouds from the cliff near the village. He had protested then, when
they had found him, waked him, and carried him home, for just as he was aroused he had been
about to sail in a golden galley for those alluring regions where the sea meets the sky. And
now he was equally resentful of awaking, for he had found his fabulous city after forty weary
years.
But three nights afterward Kuranes came again to Celephaïs. As before,
he dreamed first of the village that was asleep or dead, and of the abyss down which one must
float silently; then the rift appeared again, and he beheld the glittering minarets of the city,
and saw the graceful galleys riding at anchor in the blue harbour, and watched the gingko trees
of Mount Aran swaying in the sea-breeze. But this time he was not snatched away, and like a
winged being settled gradually over a grassy hillside till finally his feet rested gently on
the turf. He had indeed come back to the Valley of Ooth-Nargai and the splendid city of Celephaïs.
Down the hill amid scented grasses and brilliant flowers walked Kuranes, over
the bubbling Naraxa on the small wooden bridge where he had carved his name so many years ago,
and through the whispering grove to the great stone bridge by the city gate. All was as of old,
nor were the marble walls discoloured, nor the polished bronze statues upon them tarnished.
And Kuranes saw that he need not tremble lest the things he knew be vanished; for even the sentries
on the ramparts were the same, and still as young as he remembered them. When he entered the
city, past the bronze gates and over the onyx pavements, the merchants and camel-drivers greeted
him as if he had never been away; and it was the same at the turquoise temple of Nath-Horthath,
where the orchid-wreathed priests told him that there is no time in Ooth-Nargai, but only perpetual
youth. Then Kuranes walked through the Street of Pillars to the seaward wall, where gathered
the traders and sailors, and strange men from the regions where the sea meets the sky. There
he stayed long, gazing out over the bright harbour where the ripples sparkled beneath an unknown
sun, and where rode lightly the galleys from far places over the water. And he gazed also upon
Mount Aran rising regally from the shore, its lower slopes green with swaying trees and its
white summit touching the sky.
More than ever Kuranes wished to sail in a galley to the far places of which
he had heard so many strange tales, and he sought again the captain who had agreed to carry
him so long ago. He found the man, Athib, sitting on the same chest of spices he had sat upon
before, and Athib seemed not to realise that any time had passed. Then the two rowed to a galley
in the harbour, and giving orders to the oarsmen, commenced to sail out into the billowy Cerenerian
Sea that leads to the sky. For several days they glided undulatingly over the water, till finally
they came to the horizon, where the sea meets the sky. Here the galley paused not at all, but
floated easily in the blue of the sky among fleecy clouds tinted with rose. And far beneath
the keel Kuranes could see strange lands and rivers and cities of surpassing beauty, spread
indolently in the sunshine which seemed never to lessen or disappear. At length Athib told him
that their journey was near its end, and that they would soon enter the harbour of Serannian,
the pink marble city of the clouds, which is built on that ethereal coast where the west wind
flows into the sky; but as the highest of the city’s carven towers came into sight there
was a sound somewhere in space, and Kuranes awaked in his London garret.
For many months after that Kuranes sought the marvellous city of Celephaïs
and its sky-bound galleys in vain; and though his dreams carried him to many gorgeous and unheard-of
places, no one whom he met could tell him how to find Ooth-Nargai, beyond the Tanarian Hills.
One night he went flying over dark mountains where there were faint, lone campfires at great
distances apart, and strange, shaggy herds with tinkling bells on the leaders; and in the wildest
part of this hilly country, so remote that few men could ever have seen it, he found a hideously
ancient wall or causeway of stone zigzagging along the ridges and valleys; too gigantic ever
to have risen by human hands, and of such a length that neither end of it could be seen. Beyond
that wall in the grey dawn he came to a land of quaint gardens and cherry trees, and when the
sun rose he beheld such beauty of red and white flowers, green foliage and lawns, white paths,
diamond brooks, blue lakelets, carven bridges, and red-roofed pagodas, that he for a moment
forgot Celephaïs in sheer delight. But he remembered it again when he walked down a white
path toward a red-roofed pagoda, and would have questioned the people of that land about it,
had he not found that there were no people there, but only birds and bees and butterflies. On
another night Kuranes walked up a damp stone spiral stairway endlessly, and came to a tower
window overlooking a mighty plain and river lit by the full moon; and in the silent city that
spread away from the river-bank he thought he beheld some feature or arrangement which he had
known before. He would have descended and asked the way to Ooth-Nargai had not a fearsome aurora
sputtered up from some remote place beyond the horizon, shewing the ruin and antiquity of the
city, and the stagnation of the reedy river, and the death lying upon that land, as it had lain
since King Kynaratholis came home from his conquests to find the vengeance of the gods.
So Kuranes sought fruitlessly for the marvellous city of Celephaïs and
its galleys that sail to Serannian in the sky, meanwhile seeing many wonders and once barely
escaping from the high-priest not to be described, which wears a yellow silken mask over its
face and dwells all alone in a prehistoric stone monastery on the cold desert plateau of Leng.
In time he grew so impatient of the bleak intervals of day that he began buying drugs in order
to increase his periods of sleep. Hasheesh helped a great deal, and once sent him to a part
of space where form does not exist, but where glowing gases study the secrets of existence.
And a violet-coloured gas told him that this part of space was outside what he had called infinity.
The gas had not heard of planets and organisms before, but identified Kuranes merely as one
from the infinity where matter, energy, and gravitation exist. Kuranes was now very anxious
to return to minaret-studded Celephaïs, and increased his doses of drugs; but eventually
he had no more money left, and could buy no drugs. Then one summer day he was turned out of
his garret, and wandered aimlessly through the streets, drifting over a bridge to a place where
the houses grew thinner and thinner. And it was there that fulfilment came, and he met the cortege
of knights come from Celephaïs to bear him thither forever.
Handsome knights they were, astride roan horses and clad in shining armour
with tabards of cloth-of-gold curiously emblazoned. So numerous were they, that Kuranes almost
mistook them for an army, but their leader told him they were sent in his honour; since it was
he who had created Ooth-Nargai in his dreams, on which account he was now to be appointed its
chief god for evermore. Then they gave Kuranes a horse and placed him at the head of the cavalcade,
and all rode majestically through the downs of Surrey and onward toward the region where Kuranes
and his ancestors were born. It was very strange, but as the riders went on they seemed to gallop
back through Time; for whenever they passed through a village in the twilight they saw only
such houses and villages as Chaucer or men before him might have seen, and sometimes they saw
knights on horseback with small companies of retainers. When it grew dark they travelled more
swiftly, till soon they were flying uncannily as if in the air. In the dim dawn they came upon
the village which Kuranes had seen alive in his childhood, and asleep or dead in his dreams.
It was alive now, and early villagers courtesied as the horsemen clattered down the street and
turned off into the lane that ends in the abyss of dream. Kuranes had previously entered that
abyss only at night, and wondered what it would look like by day; so he watched anxiously as
the column approached its brink. Just as they galloped up the rising ground to the precipice
a golden glare came somewhere out of the east and hid all the landscape in its effulgent draperies.
The abyss was now a seething chaos of roseate and cerulean splendour, and invisible voices sang
exultantly as the knightly entourage plunged over the edge and floated gracefully down past
glittering clouds and silvery coruscations. Endlessly down the horsemen floated, their chargers
pawing the aether as if galloping over golden sands; and then the luminous vapours spread apart
to reveal a greater brightness, the brightness of the city Celephaïs, and the sea-coast
beyond, and the snowy peak overlooking the sea, and the gaily painted galleys that sail out
of the harbour toward distant regions where the sea meets the sky.
And Kuranes reigned thereafter over Ooth-Nargai and all the neighbouring regions
of dream, and held his court alternately in Celephaïs and in the cloud-fashioned Serannian.
He reigns there still, and will reign happily forever, though below the cliffs at Innsmouth
the channel tides played mockingly with the body of a tramp who had stumbled through the half-deserted
village at dawn; played mockingly, and cast it upon the rocks by ivy-covered Trevor Towers,
where a notably fat and especially offensive millionaire brewer enjoys the purchased atmosphere
of extinct nobility.


Dagon


I am writing this under an appreciable mental strain, since by tonight I shall be no more. Penniless,
and at the end of my supply of the drug which alone makes life endurable, I can bear the torture
no longer; and shall cast myself from this garret window into the squalid street below. Do not
think from my slavery to morphine that I am a weakling or a degenerate. When you have read these
hastily scrawled pages you may guess, though never fully realise, why it is that I must have
forgetfulness or death.
It was in one of the most open and least frequented parts of the broad Pacific
that the packet of which I was supercargo fell a victim to the German sea-raider. The great
war was then at its very beginning, and the ocean forces of the Hun had not completely sunk
to their later degradation; so that our vessel was made a legitimate prize, whilst we of her
crew were treated with all the fairness and consideration due us as naval prisoners. So liberal,
indeed, was the discipline of our captors, that five days after we were taken I managed to escape
alone in a small boat with water and provisions for a good length of time.
When I finally found myself adrift and free, I had but little idea of my surroundings.
Never a competent navigator, I could only guess vaguely by the sun and stars that I was somewhat
south of the equator. Of the longitude I knew nothing, and no island or coast-line was in sight.
The weather kept fair, and for uncounted days I drifted aimlessly beneath the scorching sun;
waiting either for some passing ship, or to be cast on the shores of some habitable land. But
neither ship nor land appeared, and I began to despair in my solitude upon the heaving vastnesses
of unbroken blue.
The change happened whilst I slept. Its details I shall never know; for my
slumber, though troubled and dream-infested, was continuous. When at last I awaked, it was to
discover myself half sucked into a slimy expanse of hellish black mire which extended about
me in monotonous undulations as far as I could see, and in which my boat lay grounded some distance
away.
Though one might well imagine that my first sensation would be of wonder at
so prodigious and unexpected a transformation of scenery, I was in reality more horrified than
astonished; for there was in the air and in the rotting soil a sinister quality which chilled
me to the very core. The region was putrid with the carcasses of decaying fish, and of other
less describable things which I saw protruding from the nasty mud of the unending plain. Perhaps
I should not hope to convey in mere words the unutterable hideousness that can dwell in absolute
silence and barren immensity. There was nothing within hearing, and nothing in sight save a
vast reach of black slime; yet the very completeness of the stillness and the homogeneity of
the landscape oppressed me with a nauseating fear.
The sun was blazing down from a sky which seemed to me almost black in its
cloudless cruelty; as though reflecting the inky marsh beneath my feet. As I crawled into the
stranded boat I realised that only one theory could explain my position. Through some unprecedented
volcanic upheaval, a portion of the ocean floor must have been thrown to the surface, exposing
regions which for innumerable millions of years had lain hidden under unfathomable watery depths.
So great was the extent of the new land which had risen beneath me, that I could not detect
the faintest noise of the surging ocean, strain my ears as I might. Nor were there any sea-fowl
to prey upon the dead things.
For several hours I sat thinking or brooding in the boat, which lay upon its
side and afforded a slight shade as the sun moved across the heavens. As the day progressed,
the ground lost some of its stickiness, and seemed likely to dry sufficiently for travelling
purposes in a short time. That night I slept but little, and the next day I made for myself
a pack containing food and water, preparatory to an overland journey in search of the vanished
sea and possible rescue.
On the third morning I found the soil dry enough to walk upon with ease. The
odour of the fish was maddening; but I was too much concerned with graver things to mind so
slight an evil, and set out boldly for an unknown goal. All day I forged steadily westward,
guided by a far-away hummock which rose higher than any other elevation on the rolling desert.
That night I encamped, and on the following day still travelled toward the hummock, though that
object seemed scarcely nearer than when I had first espied it. By the fourth evening I attained
the base of the mound, which turned out to be much higher than it had appeared from a distance;
an intervening valley setting it out in sharper relief from the general surface. Too weary to
ascend, I slept in the shadow of the hill.
I know not why my dreams were so wild that night; but ere the waning and fantastically
gibbous moon had risen far above the eastern plain, I was awake in a cold perspiration, determined
to sleep no more. Such visions as I had experienced were too much for me to endure again. And
in the glow of the moon I saw how unwise I had been to travel by day. Without the glare of the
parching sun, my journey would have cost me less energy; indeed, I now felt quite able to perform
the ascent which had deterred me at sunset. Picking up my pack, I started for the crest of the
eminence.
I have said that the unbroken monotony of the rolling plain was a source of
vague horror to me; but I think my horror was greater when I gained the summit of the mound
and looked down the other side into an immeasurable pit or canyon, whose black recesses the
moon had not yet soared high enough to illumine. I felt myself on the edge of the world; peering
over the rim into a fathomless chaos of eternal night. Through my terror ran curious reminiscences
of Paradise Lost, and of Satan’s hideous climb through the unfashioned realms of
darkness.
As the moon climbed higher in the sky, I began to see that the slopes of the
valley were not quite so perpendicular as I had imagined. Ledges and outcroppings of rock afforded
fairly easy foot-holds for a descent, whilst after a drop of a few hundred feet, the declivity
became very gradual. Urged on by an impulse which I cannot definitely analyse, I scrambled with
difficulty down the rocks and stood on the gentler slope beneath, gazing into the Stygian deeps
where no light had yet penetrated.
All at once my attention was captured by a vast and singular object on the
opposite slope, which rose steeply about an hundred yards ahead of me; an object that gleamed
whitely in the newly bestowed rays of the ascending moon. That it was merely a gigantic piece
of stone, I soon assured myself; but I was conscious of a distinct impression that its contour
and position were not altogether the work of Nature. A closer scrutiny filled me with sensations
I cannot express; for despite its enormous magnitude, and its position in an abyss which had
yawned at the bottom of the sea since the world was young, I perceived beyond a doubt that the
strange object was a well-shaped monolith whose massive bulk had known the workmanship and perhaps
the worship of living and thinking creatures.
Dazed and frightened, yet not without a certain thrill of the scientist’s
or archaeologist’s delight, I examined my surroundings more closely. The moon, now near
the zenith, shone weirdly and vividly above the towering steeps that hemmed in the chasm, and
revealed the fact that a far-flung body of water flowed at the bottom, winding out of sight
in both directions, and almost lapping my feet as I stood on the slope. Across the chasm, the
wavelets washed the base of the Cyclopean monolith; on whose surface I could now trace both
inscriptions and crude sculptures. The writing was in a system of hieroglyphics unknown to me,
and unlike anything I had ever seen in books; consisting for the most part of conventionalised
aquatic symbols such as fishes, eels, octopi, crustaceans, molluscs, whales, and the like. Several
characters obviously represented marine things which are unknown to the modern world, but whose
decomposing forms I had observed on the ocean-risen plain.
It was the pictorial carving, however, that did most to hold me spellbound.
Plainly visible across the intervening water on account of their enormous size, were an array
of bas-reliefs whose subjects would have excited the envy of a Doré. I think that these
things were supposed to depict men—at least, a certain sort of men; though the creatures
were shewn disporting like fishes in the waters of some marine grotto, or paying homage at some
monolithic shrine which appeared to be under the waves as well. Of their faces and forms I dare
not speak in detail; for the mere remembrance makes me grow faint. Grotesque beyond the imagination
of a Poe or a Bulwer, they were damnably human in general outline despite webbed hands and feet,
shockingly wide and flabby lips, glassy, bulging eyes, and other features less pleasant to recall.
Curiously enough, they seemed to have been chiselled badly out of proportion with their scenic
background; for one of the creatures was shewn in the act of killing a whale represented as
but little larger than himself. I remarked, as I say, their grotesqueness and strange size;
but in a moment decided that they were merely the imaginary gods of some primitive fishing or
seafaring tribe; some tribe whose last descendant had perished eras before the first ancestor
of the Piltdown or Neanderthal Man was born. Awestruck at this unexpected glimpse into a past
beyond the conception of the most daring anthropologist, I stood musing whilst the moon cast
queer reflections on the silent channel before me.
Then suddenly I saw it. With only a slight churning to mark its rise to the
surface, the thing slid into view above the dark waters. Vast, Polyphemus-like, and loathsome,
it darted like a stupendous monster of nightmares to the monolith, about which it flung its
gigantic scaly arms, the while it bowed its hideous head and gave vent to certain measured sounds.
I think I went mad then.
Of my frantic ascent of the slope and cliff, and of my delirious journey back
to the stranded boat, I remember little. I believe I sang a great deal, and laughed oddly when
I was unable to sing. I have indistinct recollections of a great storm some time after I reached
the boat; at any rate, I know that I heard peals of thunder and other tones which Nature utters
only in her wildest moods.
When I came out of the shadows I was in a San Francisco hospital; brought thither
by the captain of the American ship which had picked up my boat in mid-ocean. In my delirium
I had said much, but found that my words had been given scant attention. Of any land upheaval
in the Pacific, my rescuers knew nothing; nor did I deem it necessary to insist upon a thing
which I knew they could not believe. Once I sought out a celebrated ethnologist, and amused
him with peculiar questions regarding the ancient Philistine legend of Dagon, the Fish-God;
but soon perceiving that he was hopelessly conventional, I did not press my inquiries.
It is at night, especially when the moon is gibbous and waning, that I see
the thing. I tried morphine; but the drug has given only transient surcease, and has drawn me
into its clutches as a hopeless slave. So now I am to end it all, having written a full account
for the information or the contemptuous amusement of my fellow-men. Often I ask myself if it
could not all have been a pure phantasm—a mere freak of fever as I lay sun-stricken and
raving in the open boat after my escape from the German man-of-war. This I ask myself, but ever
does there come before me a hideously vivid vision in reply. I cannot think of the deep sea
without shuddering at the nameless things that may at this very moment be crawling and floundering
on its slimy bed, worshipping their ancient stone idols and carving their own detestable likenesses
on submarine obelisks of water-soaked granite. I dream of a day when they may rise above the
billows to drag down in their reeking talons the remnants of puny, war-exhausted mankind—of
a day when the land shall sink, and the dark ocean floor shall ascend amidst universal pandemonium.
The end is near. I hear a noise at the door, as of some immense slippery body
lumbering against it. It shall not find me. God, that hand! The window! The window!


Discarded Draft of The Shadow over Innsmouth


[pp. 1–6:]

It was in the summer of 1927 that I suddenly cut short my sightseeing tour of New England and
returned to Cleveland under a nervous strain. I have seldom mentioned the particulars of this trip,
and hardly know why I do so now except that a recent newspaper cutting has somehow relieved the
tension which formerly existed. A sweeping fire, it appears, has wiped out most of the empty
ancient houses along the deserted Innsmouth waterfront as well as a certain number of buildings
farther inland; while a singularly simultaneous explosion, heard for many miles around, has
destroyed to a vast depth the great black reef a mile and a half out from shore where the
sea-bottom abruptly falls to form an incalculable abyss. For certain reasons I take great
satisfaction in these occurrences, even the first of which seems to me a blessing rather than a
disaster. Especially am I glad that the old brick jewellery factory and the pillared Order of Dagon
Hall have gone along with the rest. There is talk of incendiarism, and I suppose old Father
Iwanicki could tell much if he chose; but what I know gives a very unusual angle to my
opinion.
I never heard of Innsmouth till the day before I saw it for the first and last
time. It does not seem to be mentioned on any modern map, and I was planning to go directly from
Newburyport to Arkham, and thence to Gloucester, if I could find transportation. I had no car, but
was travelling by motor coach, train, and trolley, always seeking the cheapest possible route. In
Newburyport they told me that the steam train was the thing to take to Arkham; and it was only at
the station ticket office, when I demurred at the high fare, that I heard about Innsmouth. The
agent, whose speech shewed him to be no local man, seemed sympathetic toward my efforts at economy,
and made a suggestion that none of my other informants had offered,
“You could take that old bus, I suppose,” he said with a certain
hesitation, “but it isn’t thought much of hereabouts. It goes through
Innsmouth—you may have heard about that—and so the people don’t like it. Run by
an Innsmouth man—Joe Sargent—but never gets any custom from here, or from Arkham
either, I guess. Wonder it keeps running at all. I suppose it’s cheap enough, but I never see
more than two or three people in it—nobody but those Innsmouth folks. Leaves the
Square—front of Hammond’s Drug Store—at 10 a.m. and 7 p.m. unless they’ve
changed lately. Looks like a terrible rattletrap—I’ve never been on it.”
That was the first I ever heard of Innsmouth. Any reference to a town not listed
in the guidebooks would have interested me, and the agent’s odd manner of allusion roused
something like real curiosity. A town able to inspire such dislike in its neighbours, I thought,
must be at least rather unusual, and worthy of a sightseer’s attention. If it came before
Arkham I would stop off there—and so I asked the agent to tell me something about it.
He was very deliberate, and spoke with an air of feeling somewhat superior to what
he said.
“Innsmouth? Well, it’s a queer kind of a town down at the mouth of the
Manuxet. It used to be almost a city—quite a seaport before the War of 1812—but the
place has all gone to pieces in the last hundred years or so. There’s no railroad—the B
& M never went through there, and the branch line from Rowley was given up years ago. More
empty houses than there are people, I guess, and no business to speak of. Everybody trades either
here or in Arkham or Ipswich. At one time they had quite a number of mills there, but
nothing’s left now but one jewellery refinery.
“That’s a pretty prominent proposition, though—all the
travelling salesmen seem to know about it. Makes a special kind of fancy jewellery out of a secret
alloy that nobody can analyse very well. They say it’s platinum, silver, and gold—but
these people sell it so cheap that you can hardly believe it. Guess they have a corner on that kind
of goods.
“Old man Marsh, who owns the thing, must be richer than Croesus. Queer old
duck, though, and sticks pretty close around the town. He’s the grandson of Capt. Obed Marsh,
who founded the business. His mother was some kind of foreigner—they say a South Sea
native—so everybody raised Cain when he married an Ipswich girl fifty years ago. They always
do that about Innsmouth people. But his children and grandchildren look just like anybody else so
far as I can see. I’ve had ’em pointed out to me here. Never saw the old man.
“And why is everybody so down on Innsmouth? Well—you mustn’t
take too much stock in what people around here say. They’re hard to get started, but once
they do get started they never stop. They’ve been telling things about
Innsmouth—whispering ’em, mostly—for the last hundred years, I guess, and I
gather they’re more scared than anything else. Some of the stories would make you
laugh—about old Captain Marsh driving bargains with the devil and bringing imps out of hell
to live in Innsmouth, or about some kind of devil-worship and awful sacrifices in some place near
the wharves that people stumbled on around 1850 or thereabouts—but I come from Panton,
Vermont, and that kind of story doesn’t go down with me.
“The real thing behind all this is simply race prejudice—and I
don’t say I’m blaming those that hold it. I hate those Innsmouth folks myself, and I
wouldn’t care to go to their town. I suppose you know—though I can see you’re a
Westerner by the way you talk—what a lot our New England ships used to have to do with queer
ports in Asia, Africa, the South Seas, and everywhere else, and what queer kinds of people they
sometimes brought back with them. You’ve probably heard about the Salem man that came back
with a Chinese wife, and maybe you know there’s still a colony of Fiji Islanders somewhere
around Cape Cod.
“Well, there must be something like that back of the Innsmouth people. The
place was always badly cut off from the rest of the country by salt marshes and inlets, and we
can’t be sure about the ins and outs of the matter, but it’s pretty plain that old
Captain Marsh must have brought home some odd specimens when he had all three of his ships in
commission back in the 1830’s and 1840’s. There certainly is a strange kind of a streak
in the Innsmouth folks today—I don’t know how to express it, but it sort of makes me
crawl. You’ll notice it a little in Joe Sargent if you take that bus. Some of them have flat
noses, big mouths, weak retreating chins, and a funny kind of rough grey skin. The sides of their
necks are sort of shrivelled or creased up, and they get bald very young. Nobody around here or in
Arkham will have anything to do with them, and they act kind of offish themselves when they come to
town. They used to ride on the railroad, walking and taking the train at Rowley or Ipswich, but now
they use that bus.
“Yes, there’s a hotel in Innsmouth—called the Gilman
House—but I don’t believe it can amount to much. I wouldn’t advise you to try it.
Better stay over here and take the ten o’clock bus tomorrow morning.  Then you can get an
evening bus there for Arkham at 8 o’clock. There was a factory inspector who stopped at the
Gilman a couple of years ago, and he had a lot of unpleasant hints about the place. It seems they
get a queer crowd there, for this fellow heard voices in other rooms that gave him the shivers. It
was foreign talk, but he said the bad thing about it was the kind of voice that sometimes spoke. It
sounded so unnatural—slopping-like, he said—that he didn’t dare go to sleep. Just
kept dressed and lit out early in the morning. The talk went on most of the night.
“This man—Casey, his name was—had a lot to say about the old
Marsh factory, and what he said fitted in very well with some of the wild stories. The books were
in no kind of shape, and the machinery looked old and almost abandoned, as if it hadn’t been
run a great deal. The place still used water power from the Lower Falls of the Manuxet. There were
only a few employees, and they didn’t seem to be doing much. It made me think, when he told
me, about the local rumours that Marsh doesn’t actually make the stuff he sells. Many people
say he doesn’t get enough factory supplies to be really running the place, and that he must
be importing those queer ornaments from somewhere—heaven knows where. I don’t believe
that, though. The Marshes have been selling those outlandish rings and armlets and tiaras and
things for nearly a hundred years; and if there were anywhere else where they got ’em, the
general public would have found out all about it by this time. Then, too, there’s no shipping
or in-bound trucking around Innsmouth that would account for such imports. What does get imported
is the queerest kind of glass and rubber trinkets—makes you think of what they used to buy in
the old days to trade with savages. But it’s a straight fact that all inspectors run up
against queer things at the plant. Twenty odd years ago one of them disappeared at
Innsmouth—never heard of again—and I myself knew George Cole, who went insane down
there one night, and had to be lugged away by two men from the Danvers asylum, where he is now. He
talks of some kind of sound and shrieks things about ‘scaly water-devils’.
“And that makes me think of another of the old stories—about the black
reef off the coast. Devil’s Reef, they call it. It’s almost above water a good part of
the time, but at that you could hardly call it a real island. The story is that there’s a
whole legion of devils seen sometimes on that reef—sprawled about, or darting in and out of
some kind of caves near the top. It’s a rugged, uneven thing, a good bit over a mile out, and
sailors used to make great detours just to avoid it. One of the things they had against Captain
Marsh was that he used to land on it sometimes when it was fairly dry. Probably the rock formation
interested him, but there was talk about his having dealings with demons. That was before the big
epidemic of 1846, when over half the people in Innsmouth were carried off. They never did quite
figure out what the trouble was, but it was probably some foreign kind of disease brought from
China or somewhere by the shipping.
“Maybe that plague took off the best blood in Innsmouth. Anyway,
they’re a doubtful lot now—and there can’t be more than 500 or 600 of them. The
rich Marshes are as bad as any. I guess they’re all what people call ‘white
trash’ down South—lawless and sly, and full of secret doings. Lobster fishermen,
mostly—exporting by truck. Nobody can ever keep track of ’em, and state school
officials and census people have a devil of a time. That’s why I wouldn’t go at night
if I were you. I’ve never been there and have no wish to go, but I guess a daytime trip
wouldn’t hurt you—even though the people here will advise you not to take it. If
you’re just sightseeing, Innsmouth ought to be quite a place for you.”
And so I spent that evening at the Newburyport Public Library looking up data
about Innsmouth. When I had tried to question natives in the shops, the lunch room, and the fire
station I had found them even harder to get started than the ticket agent had predicted, and
realised that I could not spare the time to overcome their first instinctive reticence. They had a
kind of obscure suspiciousness. At the YMCA the clerk merely discouraged my going to such a dismal,
decadent place, and the people at the library shewed much the same attitude, holding Innsmouth to
be merely an exaggerated case of civic degeneration.
The Essex County histories on the shelves had very little to say, except that the
town was founded in 1643, noted for shipbuilding before the Revolution, a seat of great marine
prosperity in the early nineteenth century, and later on a minor factory centre using the Manuxet
as power. References to decline were very few, though the significance of the later records was
unmistakable. After the Civil War all industrial life centred in the Marsh Refining Company at the
Lower Falls, and the marketing of its products formed the only remaining bit of major commerce.
There were very few foreigners; mostly Poles and Portuguese on the southern fringe of the town.
Local finances were very bad, and but for the Marsh factory the place would have been
bankrupt.
I saw a good many booklets and catalogues and advertising calendars of the Marsh
Refining Company in the business department of the library, and began to realise what a striking
thing that lone industry was. The jewels and ornaments it sold were of the finest possible artistry
and the most extreme originality; so delicately wrought, indeed, that one could not doubt but that
handicraft played a large part in at least their final stages of manufacture. Some of the half-tone
pictures of them interested me profoundly, for the strangeness and beauty of the designs seemed to
my eye indicative of a profound and exotic genius—a genius so spectacular and bizarre that
one could not help wondering whence the inspiration had come. It was easy to credit the boast of
one of the booklets that this jewellery was a favourite with persons of sophisticated taste, and
that several specimens were exhibited in museums of modern craftsmanship.
Large pieces predominated—armlets, tiaras, and elaborate pendants—but
rings and lesser items were numerous. The raised or incised designs—partly conventional and
partly with a curious marine motif—were wrought in a style of tremendous distinctiveness and
of utter dissimilarity to the art traditions of any race or epoch I knew about. This other-worldly
character was emphasised by the oddness of the precious alloy, whose general effect was suggested
in several colour-plates. Something about these pictured things fascinated me
intensely—almost disproportionately—and I resolved to see as many original specimens as
possible both at Innsmouth and in shops and museums elsewhere. Yet there was a distinct element of
repulsion mixed with the fascination; proceeding, perhaps, from the evil and silly old legends
about the founder of the business which the ticket-agent had told me.

[p. 17:]
The door of the Marsh retail office was open, and I walked in with considerable
expectancy. The interior was shabby and ill-lighted, but contained a large number of display cases
of solid and capable workmanship. A youngish man came forward to meet me, and as I studied his face
a fresh wave of disturbance passed over me. He was not unhandsome, but there was something subtly
bizarre and aberrant about his features and vocal timbre. I could not stifle a keen sudden
aversion, and acquired an unexplained reluctance to seem like any sort of curious investigator.
Before I knew it I found myself telling the fellow that I was a jewellery buyer for a Cleveland
firm, and preparing myself to shew a merely professional interest in what I should see.
It was hard, though, to carry out this policy. The clerk switched on more lights
and began to lead me from case to case, but when I beheld the glittering marvels before me I could
scarcely walk steadily or talk coherently. It took no excessive sensitiveness to beauty to make
one literally gasp at the strange, alien loveliness of these opulent objects, and as I gazed
fascinatedly I saw how little justice even the colour-plates had done them. Even now I can hardly
describe what I saw—though those who own such pieces or have seen them in shops and museums
can supply the missing data. The massed effect of so many elaborate examples was what produced my
especial feeling of awe and unrest. For somehow or other, these singular grotesques and arabesques
did not seem to be the product of any earthly handiwork—least of all a factory only a
stone’s throw away. The patterns and traceries all hinted of remote spaces and unimaginable
abysses, and the aquatic nature of the occasional pictorial items added to the general
unearthliness. Some of the fabulous monsters filled me with an uncomfortable sense of dark
pseudo-memory which I tried

[p. 21:]

the taint and blasphemy of furtive Innsmouth. He, like me, was a normal being outside the pall of
decay and normally terrified by it. But because he was so inextricably close to the thing, he had
been broken in a way that I was not yet broken.
Shaking off the hands of the firemen who sought to detain him, the ancient rose to
his feet and greeted me as if I were an acquaintance. The grocery youth had told me where most of
Uncle Zadok’s liquor was obtained, and without a word I began leading him in that
direction—through the Square and around into Eliot Street. His step was astonishingly brisk
for one of his age and bibulousness, and I marvelled at the original strength of his constitution.
My haste to leave Innsmouth had abated for the moment, and I felt instead a queer curiosity to dip
into this mumbling patriarch’s chaotic store of extravagant myth.
When we had brought a quart of whiskey in the rear of a dismal variety store, I
led Uncle Zadok along South Street to the utterly abandoned section of the waterfront, and still
farther southward to a point where even the fishermen on the distant breakwater could not see us,
where I knew we could talk undisturbed. For some reason or other he seemed to dislike this
arrangement—casting nervous glances out to sea in the direction of Devil Reef—but the
lure of the whiskey was too strong for him to resist. After we had found a seat on the edge of a
rotting wharf I gave him a pull at the bottle and waited for it to take effect. Naturally I
graduated the doses very carefully, for I did not wish the old man’s loquacity to turn into a
stupor. As he grew more mellow, I began to venture some remarks and inquiries about Innsmouth, and
was really startled by the terrible and sincere portentousness of his lowered voice. He did not
seem as crazy as his wild tales would indicate, and I found myself shuddering even when I could not
believe his fantastic inventions. I hardly wondered at the naive credulity of superstitious Father
Iwanicki.

Facts concerning the Late Arthur Jermyn and His Family


Life is a hideous thing, and from the background behind what we know of it peer daemoniacal
hints of truth which make it sometimes a thousandfold more hideous. Science, already oppressive
with its shocking revelations, will perhaps be the ultimate exterminator of our human species—if
separate species we be—for its reserve of unguessed horrors could never be borne by mortal
brains if loosed upon the world. If we knew what we are, we should do as Sir Arthur Jermyn did;
and Arthur Jermyn soaked himself in oil and set fire to his clothing one night. No one placed
the charred fragments in an urn or set a memorial to him who had been; for certain papers and
a certain boxed object were found, which made men wish to forget. Some who knew him do
not admit that he ever existed.
Arthur Jermyn went out on the moor and burned himself after seeing the boxed
object which had come from Africa. It was this object, and not his peculiar personal
appearance, which made him end his life. Many would have disliked to live if possessed of the
peculiar features of Arthur Jermyn, but he had been a poet and scholar and had not minded. Learning
was in his blood, for his great-grandfather, Sir Robert Jermyn, Bt., had been an anthropologist
of note, whilst his great-great-great-grandfather, Sir Wade Jermyn, was one of the earliest
explorers of the Congo region, and had written eruditely of its tribes, animals, and supposed
antiquities. Indeed, old Sir Wade had possessed an intellectual zeal amounting almost to a mania;
his bizarre conjectures on a prehistoric white Congolese civilisation earning him much ridicule
when his book, Observations on the Several Parts of Africa, was published. In 1765 this
fearless explorer had been placed in a madhouse at Huntingdon.
Madness was in all the Jermyns, and people were glad there were not many of
them. The line put forth no branches, and Arthur was the last of it. If he had not been, one
cannot say what he would have done when the object came. The Jermyns never seemed to
look quite right—something was amiss, though Arthur was the worst, and the old family
portraits in Jermyn House shewed fine faces enough before Sir Wade’s time. Certainly,
the madness began with Sir Wade, whose wild stories of Africa were at once the delight and terror
of his few friends. It shewed in his collection of trophies and specimens, which were not such
as a normal man would accumulate and preserve, and appeared strikingly in the Oriental seclusion
in which he kept his wife. The latter, he had said, was the daughter of a Portuguese trader
whom he had met in Africa; and did not like English ways. She, with an infant son born in Africa,
had accompanied him back from the second and longest of his trips, and had gone with him on the
third and last, never returning. No one had ever seen her closely, not even the servants; for
her disposition had been violent and singular. During her brief stay at Jermyn House she occupied
a remote wing, and was waited on by her husband alone. Sir Wade was, indeed, most peculiar in
his solicitude for his family; for when he returned to Africa he would permit no one to care
for his young son save a loathsome black woman from Guinea. Upon coming back, after the death
of Lady Jermyn, he himself assumed complete care of the boy.
But it was the talk of Sir Wade, especially when in his cups, which chiefly
led his friends to deem him mad. In a rational age like the eighteenth century it was unwise
for a man of learning to talk about wild sights and strange scenes under a Congo moon; of the
gigantic walls and pillars of a forgotten city, crumbling and vine-grown, and of damp, silent,
stone steps leading interminably down into the darkness of abysmal treasure-vaults and inconceivable
catacombs. Especially was it unwise to rave of the living things that might haunt such a place;
of creatures half of the jungle and half of the impiously aged city—fabulous creatures
which even a Pliny might describe with scepticism; things that might have sprung up after the
great apes had overrun the dying city with the walls and the pillars, the vaults and the weird
carvings. Yet after he came home for the last time Sir Wade would speak of such matters with
a shudderingly uncanny zest, mostly after his third glass at the Knight’s Head; boasting
of what he had found in the jungle and of how he had dwelt among terrible ruins known only to
him. And finally he had spoken of the living things in such a manner that he was taken to the
madhouse. He had shewn little regret when shut into the barred room at Huntingdon, for his mind
moved curiously. Ever since his son had commenced to grow out of infancy he had liked his home
less and less, till at last he had seemed to dread it. The Knight’s Head had been his
headquarters, and when he was confined he expressed some vague gratitude as if for protection.
Three years later he died.
Wade Jermyn’s son Philip was a highly peculiar person. Despite a strong
physical resemblance to his father, his appearance and conduct were in many particulars so coarse
that he was universally shunned. Though he did not inherit the madness which was feared by some,
he was densely stupid and given to brief periods of uncontrollable violence. In frame he was
small, but intensely powerful, and was of incredible agility. Twelve years after succeeding
to his title he married the daughter of his gamekeeper, a person said to be of gypsy extraction,
but before his son was born joined the navy as a common sailor, completing the general disgust
which his habits and mesalliance had begun. After the close of the American war he was heard
of as a sailor on a merchantman in the African trade, having a kind of reputation for feats
of strength and climbing, but finally disappearing one night as his ship lay off the Congo coast.
In the son of Sir Philip Jermyn the now accepted family peculiarity took a
strange and fatal turn. Tall and fairly handsome, with a sort of weird Eastern grace despite
certain slight oddities of proportion, Robert Jermyn began life as a scholar and investigator.
It was he who first studied scientifically the vast collection of relics which his mad grandfather
had brought from Africa, and who made the family name as celebrated in ethnology as in exploration.
In 1815 Sir Robert married a daughter of the seventh Viscount Brightholme and was subsequently
blessed with three children, the eldest and youngest of whom were never publicly seen on account
of deformities in mind and body. Saddened by these family misfortunes, the scientist sought
relief in work, and made two long expeditions in the interior of Africa. In 1849 his second
son, Nevil, a singularly repellent person who seemed to combine the surliness of Philip Jermyn
with the hauteur of the Brightholmes, ran away with a vulgar dancer, but was pardoned upon his
return in the following year. He came back to Jermyn House a widower with an infant son, Alfred,
who was one day to be the father of Arthur Jermyn.
Friends said that it was this series of griefs which unhinged the mind of Sir
Robert Jermyn, yet it was probably merely a bit of African folklore which caused the disaster.
The elderly scholar had been collecting legends of the Onga tribes near the field of his grandfather’s
and his own explorations, hoping in some way to account for Sir Wade’s wild tales of a
lost city peopled by strange hybrid creatures. A certain consistency in the strange papers of
his ancestor suggested that the madman’s imagination might have been stimulated by native
myths. On October 19, 1852, the explorer Samuel Seaton called at Jermyn House with a manuscript
of notes collected among the Ongas, believing that certain legends of a grey city of white apes
ruled by a white god might prove valuable to the ethnologist. In his conversation he probably
supplied many additional details; the nature of which will never be known, since a hideous series
of tragedies suddenly burst into being. When Sir Robert Jermyn emerged from his library he left
behind the strangled corpse of the explorer, and before he could be restrained, had put an end
to all three of his children; the two who were never seen, and the son who had run away. Nevil
Jermyn died in the successful defence of his own two-year-old son, who had apparently been included
in the old man’s madly murderous scheme. Sir Robert himself, after repeated attempts at
suicide and a stubborn refusal to utter any articulate sound, died of apoplexy in the second
year of his confinement.
Sir Alfred Jermyn was a baronet before his fourth birthday, but his tastes
never matched his title. At twenty he had joined a band of music-hall performers, and at thirty-six
had deserted his wife and child to travel with an itinerant American circus. His end was very
revolting. Among the animals in the exhibition with which he travelled was a huge bull gorilla
of lighter colour than the average; a surprisingly tractable beast of much popularity with the
performers. With this gorilla Alfred Jermyn was singularly fascinated, and on many occasions
the two would eye each other for long periods through the intervening bars. Eventually Jermyn
asked and obtained permission to train the animal, astonishing audiences and fellow-performers
alike with his success. One morning in Chicago, as the gorilla and Alfred Jermyn were rehearsing
an exceedingly clever boxing match, the former delivered a blow of more than usual force, hurting
both the body and dignity of the amateur trainer. Of what followed, members of “The Greatest
Show on Earth” do not like to speak. They did not expect to hear Sir Alfred Jermyn emit
a shrill, inhuman scream, or to see him seize his clumsy antagonist with both hands, dash it
to the floor of the cage, and bite fiendishly at its hairy throat. The gorilla was off its guard,
but not for long, and before anything could be done by the regular trainer the body which had
belonged to a baronet was past recognition.
II.
Arthur Jermyn was the son of Sir Alfred Jermyn and a music-hall singer of unknown
origin. When the husband and father deserted his family, the mother took the child to Jermyn
House; where there was none left to object to her presence. She was not without notions of what
a nobleman’s dignity should be, and saw to it that her son received the best education
which limited money could provide. The family resources were now sadly slender, and Jermyn House
had fallen into woeful disrepair, but young Arthur loved the old edifice and all its contents.
He was not like any other Jermyn who had ever lived, for he was a poet and a dreamer. Some of
the neighbouring families who had heard tales of old Sir Wade Jermyn’s unseen Portuguese
wife declared that her Latin blood must be shewing itself; but most persons merely sneered at
his sensitiveness to beauty, attributing it to his music-hall mother, who was socially unrecognised.
The poetic delicacy of Arthur Jermyn was the more remarkable because of his uncouth personal
appearance. Most of the Jermyns had possessed a subtly odd and repellent cast, but Arthur’s
case was very striking. It is hard to say just what he resembled, but his expression, his facial
angle, and the length of his arms gave a thrill of repulsion to those who met him for the first
time.
It was the mind and character of Arthur Jermyn which atoned for his aspect.
Gifted and learned, he took highest honours at Oxford and seemed likely to redeem the intellectual
fame of his family. Though of poetic rather than scientific temperament, he planned to continue
the work of his forefathers in African ethnology and antiquities, utilising the truly wonderful
though strange collection of Sir Wade. With his fanciful mind he thought often of the prehistoric
civilisation in which the mad explorer had so implicitly believed, and would weave tale after
tale about the silent jungle city mentioned in the latter’s wilder notes and paragraphs.
For the nebulous utterances concerning a nameless, unsuspected race of jungle hybrids he had
a peculiar feeling of mingled terror and attraction; speculating on the possible basis of such
a fancy, and seeking to obtain light among the more recent data gleaned by his great-grandfather
and Samuel Seaton amongst the Ongas.
In 1911, after the death of his mother, Sir Arthur Jermyn determined to pursue
his investigations to the utmost extent. Selling a portion of his estate to obtain the requisite
money, he outfitted an expedition and sailed for the Congo. Arranging with the Belgian authorities
for a party of guides, he spent a year in the Onga and Kaliri country, finding data beyond the
highest of his expectations. Among the Kaliris was an aged chief called Mwanu, who possessed
not only a highly retentive memory, but a singular degree of intelligence and interest in old
legends. This ancient confirmed every tale which Jermyn had heard, adding his own account of
the stone city and the white apes as it had been told to him.
According to Mwanu, the grey city and the hybrid creatures were no more, having
been annihilated by the warlike N’bangus many years ago. This tribe, after destroying
most of the edifices and killing the live beings, had carried off the stuffed goddess which
had been the object of their quest; the white ape-goddess which the strange beings worshipped,
and which was held by Congo tradition to be the form of one who had reigned as a princess among
those beings. Just what the white ape-like creatures could have been, Mwanu had no idea, but
he thought they were the builders of the ruined city. Jermyn could form no conjecture, but by
close questioning obtained a very picturesque legend of the stuffed goddess.
The ape-princess, it was said, became the consort of a great white god who
had come out of the West. For a long time they had reigned over the city together, but when
they had a son all three went away. Later the god and the princess had returned, and upon the
death of the princess her divine husband had mummified the body and enshrined it in a vast house
of stone, where it was worshipped. Then he had departed alone. The legend here seemed to present
three variants. According to one story nothing further happened save that the stuffed goddess
became a symbol of supremacy for whatever tribe might possess it. It was for this reason that
the N’bangus carried it off. A second story told of the god’s return and death at
the feet of his enshrined wife. A third told of the return of the son, grown to manhood—or
apehood or godhood, as the case might be—yet unconscious of his identity. Surely the imaginative
blacks had made the most of whatever events might lie behind the extravagant legendry.
Of the reality of the jungle city described by old Sir Wade, Arthur Jermyn
had no further doubt; and was hardly astonished when early in 1912 he came upon what was left
of it. Its size must have been exaggerated, yet the stones lying about proved that it was no
mere negro village. Unfortunately no carvings could be found, and the small size of the expedition
prevented operations toward clearing the one visible passageway that seemed to lead down into
the system of vaults which Sir Wade had mentioned. The white apes and the stuffed goddess were
discussed with all the native chiefs of the region, but it remained for a European to improve
on the data offered by old Mwanu. M. Verhaeren, Belgian agent at a trading-post on the Congo,
believed that he could not only locate but obtain the stuffed goddess, of which he had vaguely
heard; since the once mighty N’bangus were now the submissive servants of King Albert’s
government, and with but little persuasion could be induced to part with the gruesome deity
they had carried off. When Jermyn sailed for England, therefore, it was with the exultant probability
that he would within a few months receive a priceless ethnological relic confirming the wildest
of his great-great-great-grandfather’s narratives—that is, the wildest which he
had ever heard. Countrymen near Jermyn House had perhaps heard wilder tales handed down from
ancestors who had listened to Sir Wade around the tables of the Knight’s Head.
Arthur Jermyn waited very patiently for the expected box from M. Verhaeren,
meanwhile studying with increased diligence the manuscripts left by his mad ancestor. He began
to feel closely akin to Sir Wade, and to seek relics of the latter’s personal life in
England as well as of his African exploits. Oral accounts of the mysterious and secluded wife
had been numerous, but no tangible relic of her stay at Jermyn House remained. Jermyn wondered
what circumstance had prompted or permitted such an effacement, and decided that the husband’s
insanity was the prime cause. His great-great-great-grandmother, he recalled, was said to have
been the daughter of a Portuguese trader in Africa. No doubt her practical heritage and superficial
knowledge of the Dark Continent had caused her to flout Sir Wade’s talk of the interior,
a thing which such a man would not be likely to forgive. She had died in Africa, perhaps dragged
thither by a husband determined to prove what he had told. But as Jermyn indulged in these reflections
he could not but smile at their futility, a century and a half after the death of both of his
strange progenitors.
In June, 1913, a letter arrived from M. Verhaeren, telling of the finding of
the stuffed goddess. It was, the Belgian averred, a most extraordinary object; an object quite
beyond the power of a layman to classify. Whether it was human or simian only a scientist could
determine, and the process of determination would be greatly hampered by its imperfect condition.
Time and the Congo climate are not kind to mummies; especially when their preparation is as
amateurish as seemed to be the case here. Around the creature’s neck had been found a
golden chain bearing an empty locket on which were armorial designs; no doubt some hapless traveller’s
keepsake, taken by the N’bangus and hung upon the goddess as a charm. In commenting on
the contour of the mummy’s face, M. Verhaeren suggested a whimsical comparison; or rather,
expressed a humorous wonder just how it would strike his correspondent, but was too much interested
scientifically to waste many words in levity. The stuffed goddess, he wrote, would arrive duly
packed about a month after receipt of the letter.
The boxed object was delivered at Jermyn House on the afternoon of August 3,
1913, being conveyed immediately to the large chamber which housed the collection of African
specimens as arranged by Sir Robert and Arthur. What ensued can best be gathered from the tales
of servants and from things and papers later examined. Of the various tales that of aged Soames,
the family butler, is most ample and coherent. According to this trustworthy man, Sir Arthur
Jermyn dismissed everyone from the room before opening the box, though the instant sound of
hammer and chisel shewed that he did not delay the operation. Nothing was heard for some time;
just how long Soames cannot exactly estimate; but it was certainly less than a quarter of an
hour later that the horrible scream, undoubtedly in Jermyn’s voice, was heard. Immediately
afterward Jermyn emerged from the room, rushing frantically toward the front of the house as
if pursued by some hideous enemy. The expression on his face, a face ghastly enough in repose,
was beyond description. When near the front door he seemed to think of something, and turned
back in his flight, finally disappearing down the stairs to the cellar. The servants were utterly
dumbfounded, and watched at the head of the stairs, but their master did not return. A smell
of oil was all that came up from the regions below. After dark a rattling was heard at the door
leading from the cellar into the courtyard; and a stable-boy saw Arthur Jermyn, glistening from
head to foot with oil and redolent of that fluid, steal furtively out and vanish on the black
moor surrounding the house. Then, in an exaltation of supreme horror, everyone saw the end.
A spark appeared on the moor, a flame arose, and a pillar of human fire reached to the heavens.
The house of Jermyn no longer existed.
The reason why Arthur Jermyn’s charred fragments were not collected and
buried lies in what was found afterward, principally the thing in the box. The stuffed goddess
was a nauseous sight, withered and eaten away, but it was clearly a mummified white ape of some
unknown species, less hairy than any recorded variety, and infinitely nearer mankind—quite
shockingly so. Detailed description would be rather unpleasant, but two salient particulars
must be told, for they fit in revoltingly with certain notes of Sir Wade Jermyn’s African
expeditions and with the Congolese legends of the white god and the ape-princess. The two particulars
in question are these: the arms on the golden locket about the creature’s neck were the
Jermyn arms, and the jocose suggestion of M. Verhaeren about a certain resemblance as connected
with the shrivelled face applied with vivid, ghastly, and unnatural horror to none other than
the sensitive Arthur Jermyn, great-great-great-grandson of Sir Wade Jermyn and an unknown wife.
Members of the Royal Anthropological Institute burned the thing and threw the locket into a
well, and some of them do not admit that Arthur Jermyn ever existed.


From Beyond


Horrible beyond conception was the change which had taken place in my best friend, Crawford
Tillinghast. I had not seen him since that day, two months and a half before, when he had told
me toward what goal his physical and metaphysical researches were leading; when he had answered
my awed and almost frightened remonstrances by driving me from his laboratory and his house
in a burst of fanatical rage. I had known that he now remained mostly shut in the attic laboratory
with that accursed electrical machine, eating little and excluding even the servants, but I
had not thought that a brief period of ten weeks could so alter and disfigure any human creature.
It is not pleasant to see a stout man suddenly grown thin, and it is even worse when the baggy
skin becomes yellowed or greyed, the eyes sunken, circled, and uncannily glowing, the forehead
veined and corrugated, and the hands tremulous and twitching. And if added to this there be
a repellent unkemptness; a wild disorder of dress, a bushiness of dark hair white at the roots,
and an unchecked growth of pure white beard on a face once clean-shaven, the cumulative effect
is quite shocking. But such was the aspect of Crawford Tillinghast on the night his half-coherent
message brought me to his door after my weeks of exile; such the spectre that trembled as it
admitted me, candle in hand, and glanced furtively over its shoulder as if fearful of unseen
things in the ancient, lonely house set back from Benevolent Street.
That Crawford Tillinghast should ever have studied science and philosophy was
a mistake. These things should be left to the frigid and impersonal investigator, for they offer
two equally tragic alternatives to the man of feeling and action; despair if he fail in his
quest, and terrors unutterable and unimaginable if he succeed. Tillinghast had once been the
prey of failure, solitary and melancholy; but now I knew, with nauseating fears of my own, that
he was the prey of success. I had indeed warned him ten weeks before, when he burst forth with
his tale of what he felt himself about to discover. He had been flushed and excited then, talking
in a high and unnatural, though always pedantic, voice.
“What do we know,” he had said, “of the world and the universe
about us? Our means of receiving impressions are absurdly few, and our notions of surrounding
objects infinitely narrow. We see things only as we are constructed to see them, and can gain
no idea of their absolute nature. With five feeble senses we pretend to comprehend the boundlessly
complex cosmos, yet other beings with a wider, stronger, or different range of senses might
not only see very differently the things we see, but might see and study whole worlds of matter,
energy, and life which lie close at hand yet can never be detected with the senses we have.
I have always believed that such strange, inaccessible worlds exist at our very elbows, and
now I believe I have found a way to break down the barriers. I am not joking. Within twenty-four
hours that machine near the table will generate waves acting on unrecognised sense-organs that
exist in us as atrophied or rudimentary vestiges. Those waves will open up to us many vistas
unknown to man, and several unknown to anything we consider organic life. We shall see that
at which dogs howl in the dark, and that at which cats prick up their ears after midnight. We
shall see these things, and other things which no breathing creature has yet seen. We shall
overleap time, space, and dimensions, and without bodily motion peer to the bottom of creation.
When Tillinghast said these things I remonstrated, for I knew him well enough
to be frightened rather than amused; but he was a fanatic, and drove me from the house. Now
he was no less a fanatic, but his desire to speak had conquered his resentment, and he had written
me imperatively in a hand I could scarcely recognise. As I entered the abode of the friend so
suddenly metamorphosed to a shivering gargoyle, I became infected with the terror which seemed
stalking in all the shadows. The words and beliefs expressed ten weeks before seemed bodied
forth in the darkness beyond the small circle of candle light, and I sickened at the hollow,
altered voice of my host. I wished the servants were about, and did not like it when he said
they had all left three days previously. It seemed strange that old Gregory, at least, should
desert his master without telling as tried a friend as I. It was he who had given me all the
information I had of Tillinghast after I was repulsed in rage.
Yet I soon subordinated all my fears to my growing curiosity and fascination.
Just what Crawford Tillinghast now wished of me I could only guess, but that he had some stupendous
secret or discovery to impart, I could not doubt. Before I had protested at his unnatural pryings
into the unthinkable; now that he had evidently succeeded to some degree I almost shared his
spirit, terrible though the cost of victory appeared. Up through the dark emptiness of the house
I followed the bobbing candle in the hand of this shaking parody on man. The electricity seemed
to be turned off, and when I asked my guide he said it was for a definite reason.
“It would be too much . . . I would not dare,” he
continued to mutter. I especially noted his new habit of muttering, for it was not like him
to talk to himself. We entered the laboratory in the attic, and I observed that detestable electrical
machine, glowing with a sickly, sinister, violet luminosity. It was connected with a powerful
chemical battery, but seemed to be receiving no current; for I recalled that in its experimental
stage it had sputtered and purred when in action. In reply to my question Tillinghast mumbled
that this permanent glow was not electrical in any sense that I could understand.
He now seated me near the machine, so that it was on my right, and turned a
switch somewhere below the crowning cluster of glass bulbs. The usual sputtering began, turned
to a whine, and terminated in a drone so soft as to suggest a return to silence. Meanwhile the
luminosity increased, waned again, then assumed a pale, outré colour or blend of colours
which I could neither place nor describe. Tillinghast had been watching me, and noted my puzzled
expression.
“Do you know what that is?” he whispered. “That is ultra-violet.”
He chuckled oddly at my surprise. “You thought ultra-violet was invisible, and so it is—but
you can see that and many other invisible things now.
“Listen to me! The waves from that thing are waking a thousand sleeping
senses in us; senses which we inherit from aeons of evolution from the state of detached electrons
to the state of organic humanity. I have seen truth, and I intend to shew it to you.
Do you wonder how it will seem? I will tell you.” Here Tillinghast seated himself directly
opposite me, blowing out his candle and staring hideously into my eyes. “Your existing
sense-organs—ears first, I think—will pick up many of the impressions, for they
are closely connected with the dormant organs. Then there will be others. You have heard of
the pineal gland? I laugh at the shallow endocrinologist, fellow-dupe and fellow-parvenu of
the Freudian. That gland is the great sense-organ of organs—I have found out. It
is like sight in the end, and transmits visual pictures to the brain. If you are normal, that
is the way you ought to get most of it . . . I mean get most of the evidence
from beyond.”
I looked about the immense attic room with the sloping south wall, dimly lit
by rays which the every-day eye cannot see. The far corners were all shadows, and the whole
place took on a hazy unreality which obscured its nature and invited the imagination to symbolism
and phantasm. During the interval that Tillinghast was silent I fancied myself in some vast
and incredible temple of long-dead gods; some vague edifice of innumerable black stone columns
reaching up from a floor of damp slabs to a cloudy height beyond the range of my vision. The
picture was very vivid for a while, but gradually gave way to a more horrible conception; that
of utter, absolute solitude in infinite, sightless, soundless space. There seemed to be a void,
and nothing more, and I felt a childish fear which prompted me to draw from my hip pocket the
revolver I always carried after dark since the night I was held up in East Providence. Then,
from the farthermost regions of remoteness, the sound softly glided into existence. It
was infinitely faint, subtly vibrant, and unmistakably musical, but held a quality of surpassing
wildness which made its impact feel like a delicate torture of my whole body. I felt sensations
like those one feels when accidentally scratching ground glass. Simultaneously there developed
something like a cold draught, which apparently swept past me from the direction of the distant
sound. As I waited breathlessly I perceived that both sound and wind were increasing; the effect
being to give me an odd notion of myself as tied to a pair of rails in the path of a gigantic
approaching locomotive. I began to speak to Tillinghast, and as I did so all the unusual impressions
abruptly vanished. I saw only the man, the glowing machine, and the dim apartment. Tillinghast
was grinning repulsively at the revolver which I had almost unconsciously drawn, but from his
expression I was sure he had seen and heard as much as I, if not a great deal more. I whispered
what I had experienced, and he bade me to remain as quiet and receptive as possible.
“Don’t move,” he cautioned, “for in these rays we
are able to be seen as well as to see. I told you the servants left, but I didn’t
tell you how. It was that thick-witted housekeeper—she turned on the lights downstairs
after I had warned her not to, and the wires picked up sympathetic vibrations. It must have
been frightful—I could hear the screams up here in spite of all I was seeing and hearing
from another direction, and later it was rather awful to find those empty heaps of clothes around
the house. Mrs. Updike’s clothes were close to the front hall switch—that’s
how I know she did it. It got them all. But so long as we don’t move we’re fairly
safe. Remember we’re dealing with a hideous world in which we are practically helpless. . . .
Keep still!”
The combined shock of the revelation and of the abrupt command gave me a kind
of paralysis, and in my terror my mind again opened to the impressions coming from what Tillinghast
called “beyond”. I was now in a vortex of sound and motion, with confused
pictures before my eyes. I saw the blurred outlines of the room, but from some point in space
there seemed to be pouring a seething column of unrecognisable shapes or clouds, penetrating
the solid roof at a point ahead and to the right of me. Then I glimpsed the temple-like effect
again, but this time the pillars reached up into an aërial ocean of light, which sent down
one blinding beam along the path of the cloudy column I had seen before. After that the scene
was almost wholly kaleidoscopic, and in the jumble of sights, sounds, and unidentified sense-impressions
I felt that I was about to dissolve or in some way lose the solid form. One definite flash I
shall always remember. I seemed for an instant to behold a patch of strange night sky filled
with shining, revolving spheres, and as it receded I saw that the glowing suns formed a constellation
or galaxy of settled shape; this shape being the distorted face of Crawford Tillinghast. At
another time I felt the huge animate things brushing past me and occasionally walking or
drifting through my supposedly solid body, and thought I saw Tillinghast look at them as
though his better trained senses could catch them visually. I recalled what he had said of the
pineal gland, and wondered what he saw with this preternatural eye.
Suddenly I myself became possessed of a kind of augmented sight. Over and above
the luminous and shadowy chaos arose a picture which, though vague, held the elements of consistency
and permanence. It was indeed somewhat familiar, for the unusual part was superimposed upon
the usual terrestrial scene much as a cinema view may be thrown upon the painted curtain of
a theatre. I saw the attic laboratory, the electrical machine, and the unsightly form of Tillinghast
opposite me; but of all the space unoccupied by familiar material objects not one particle was
vacant. Indescribable shapes both alive and otherwise were mixed in disgusting disarray, and
close to every known thing were whole worlds of alien, unknown entities. It likewise seemed
that all the known things entered into the composition of other unknown things, and vice versa.
Foremost among the living objects were great inky, jellyish monstrosities which flabbily quivered
in harmony with the vibrations from the machine. They were present in loathsome profusion, and
I saw to my horror that they overlapped; that they were semi-fluid and capable of passing
through one another and through what we know as solids. These things were never still, but seemed
ever floating about with some malignant purpose. Sometimes they appeared to devour one another,
the attacker launching itself at its victim and instantaneously obliterating the latter from
sight. Shudderingly I felt that I knew what had obliterated the unfortunate servants, and could
not exclude the things from my mind as I strove to observe other properties of the newly visible
world that lies unseen around us. But Tillinghast had been watching me, and was speaking.
“You see them? You see them? You see the things that float and flop about
you and through you every moment of your life? You see the creatures that form what men call
the pure air and the blue sky? Have I not succeeded in breaking down the barrier; have I not
shewn you worlds that no other living men have seen?” I heard him scream through the horrible
chaos, and looked at the wild face thrust so offensively close to mine. His eyes were pits of
flame, and they glared at me with what I now saw was overwhelming hatred. The machine droned
detestably.
“You think those floundering things wiped out the servants? Fool, they
are harmless! But the servants are gone, aren’t they? You tried to stop me; you
discouraged me when I needed every drop of encouragement I could get; you were afraid of the
cosmic truth, you damned coward, but now I’ve got you! What swept up the servants? What
made them scream so loud? . . . Don’t know, eh? You’ll know soon enough!
Look at me—listen to what I say—do you suppose there are really any such things
as time and magnitude? Do you fancy there are such things as form or matter? I tell you, I have
struck depths that your little brain can’t picture! I have seen beyond the bounds of infinity
and drawn down daemons from the stars. . . . I have harnessed the shadows that
stride from world to world to sow death and madness. . . . Space belongs to me, do
you hear? Things are hunting me now—the things that devour and dissolve—but I know
how to elude them. It is you they will get, as they got the servants. Stirring, dear sir? I
told you it was dangerous to move. I have saved you so far by telling you to keep still—saved
you to see more sights and to listen to me. If you had moved, they would have been at you long
ago. Don’t worry, they won’t hurt you. They didn’t hurt the servants—it
was seeing that made the poor devils scream so. My pets are not pretty, for they come
out of places where aesthetic standards are—very different. Disintegration is quite
painless, I assure you—but I want you to see them. I almost saw them, but I knew
how to stop. You are not curious? I always knew you were no scientist! Trembling, eh? Trembling
with anxiety to see the ultimate things I have discovered? Why don’t you move, then? Tired?
Well, don’t worry, my friend, for they are coming. . . . Look! Look,
curse you, look! . . . It’s just over your left shoulder. . . .”
What remains to be told is very brief, and may be familiar to you from the
newspaper accounts. The police heard a shot in the old Tillinghast house and found us there—Tillinghast
dead and me unconscious. They arrested me because the revolver was in my hand, but released
me in three hours, after they found it was apoplexy which had finished Tillinghast and saw that
my shot had been directed at the noxious machine which now lay hopelessly shattered on the laboratory
floor. I did not tell very much of what I had seen, for I feared the coroner would be sceptical;
but from the evasive outline I did give, the doctor told me that I had undoubtedly been hypnotised
by the vindictive and homicidal madman.
I wish I could believe that doctor. It would help my shaky nerves if I could
dismiss what I now have to think of the air and the sky about and above me. I never feel alone
or comfortable, and a hideous sense of pursuit sometimes comes chillingly on me when I am weary.
What prevents me from believing the doctor is this one simple fact—that the police never
found the bodies of those servants whom they say Crawford Tillinghast murdered.


Herbert West—Reanimator

I. From the Dark

Of Herbert West, who was my friend in college and in after life, I can speak only with extreme
terror. This terror is not due altogether to the sinister manner of his recent disappearance,
but was engendered by the whole nature of his life-work, and first gained its acute form more
than seventeen years ago, when we were in the third year of our course at the Miskatonic University
Medical School in Arkham. While he was with me, the wonder and diabolism of his experiments
fascinated me utterly, and I was his closest companion. Now that he is gone and the spell is
broken, the actual fear is greater. Memories and possibilities are ever more hideous than realities.
The first horrible incident of our acquaintance was the greatest shock I ever
experienced, and it is only with reluctance that I repeat it. As I have said, it happened when
we were in the medical school, where West had already made himself notorious through his wild
theories on the nature of death and the possibility of overcoming it artificially. His views,
which were widely ridiculed by the faculty and his fellow-students, hinged on the essentially
mechanistic nature of life; and concerned means for operating the organic machinery of mankind
by calculated chemical action after the failure of natural processes. In his experiments with
various animating solutions he had killed and treated immense numbers of rabbits, guinea-pigs,
cats, dogs, and monkeys, till he had become the prime nuisance of the college. Several times
he had actually obtained signs of life in animals supposedly dead; in many cases violent signs;
but he soon saw that the perfection of this process, if indeed possible, would necessarily involve
a lifetime of research. It likewise became clear that, since the same solution never worked
alike on different organic species, he would require human subjects for further and more specialised
progress. It was here that he first came into conflict with the college authorities, and was
debarred from future experiments by no less a dignitary than the dean of the medical school
himself—the learned and benevolent Dr. Allan Halsey, whose work in behalf of the stricken
is recalled by every old resident of Arkham.
I had always been exceptionally tolerant of West’s pursuits, and we frequently
discussed his theories, whose ramifications and corollaries were almost infinite. Holding with
Haeckel that all life is a chemical and physical process, and that the so-called “soul”
is a myth, my friend believed that artificial reanimation of the dead can depend only on the
condition of the tissues; and that unless actual decomposition has set in, a corpse fully equipped
with organs may with suitable measures be set going again in the peculiar fashion known as life.
That the psychic or intellectual life might be impaired by the slight deterioration of sensitive
brain-cells which even a short period of death would be apt to cause, West fully realised. It
had at first been his hope to find a reagent which would restore vitality before the actual
advent of death, and only repeated failures on animals had shewn him that the natural and artificial
life-motions were incompatible. He then sought extreme freshness in his specimens, injecting
his solutions into the blood immediately after the extinction of life. It was this circumstance
which made the professors so carelessly sceptical, for they felt that true death had not occurred
in any case. They did not stop to view the matter closely and reasoningly.
It was not long after the faculty had interdicted his work that West confided
to me his resolution to get fresh human bodies in some manner, and continue in secret the experiments
he could no longer perform openly. To hear him discussing ways and means was rather ghastly,
for at the college we had never procured anatomical specimens ourselves. Whenever the morgue
proved inadequate, two local negroes attended to this matter, and they were seldom questioned.
West was then a small, slender, spectacled youth with delicate features, yellow hair, pale blue
eyes, and a soft voice, and it was uncanny to hear him dwelling on the relative merits of Christchurch
Cemetery and the potter’s field. We finally decided on the potter’s field, because
practically every body in Christchurch was embalmed; a thing of course ruinous to West’s
researches.
I was by this time his active and enthralled assistant, and helped him make
all his decisions, not only concerning the source of bodies but concerning a suitable place
for our loathsome work. It was I who thought of the deserted Chapman farmhouse beyond Meadow
Hill, where we fitted up on the ground floor an operating room and a laboratory, each with dark
curtains to conceal our midnight doings. The place was far from any road, and in sight of no
other house, yet precautions were none the less necessary; since rumours of strange lights,
started by chance nocturnal roamers, would soon bring disaster on our enterprise. It was agreed
to call the whole thing a chemical laboratory if discovery should occur. Gradually we equipped
our sinister haunt of science with materials either purchased in Boston or quietly borrowed
from the college—materials carefully made unrecognisable save to expert eyes—and
provided spades and picks for the many burials we should have to make in the cellar. At the
college we used an incinerator, but the apparatus was too costly for our unauthorised laboratory.
Bodies were always a nuisance—even the small guinea-pig bodies from the slight clandestine
experiments in West’s room at the boarding-house.
We followed the local death-notices like ghouls, for our specimens demanded
particular qualities. What we wanted were corpses interred soon after death and without artificial
preservation; preferably free from malforming disease, and certainly with all organs present.
Accident victims were our best hope. Not for many weeks did we hear of anything suitable; though
we talked with morgue and hospital authorities, ostensibly in the college’s interest,
as often as we could without exciting suspicion. We found that the college had first choice
in every case, so that it might be necessary to remain in Arkham during the summer, when only
the limited summer-school classes were held. In the end, though, luck favoured us; for one day
we heard of an almost ideal case in the potter’s field; a brawny young workman drowned
only the morning before in Sumner’s Pond, and buried at the town’s expense without
delay or embalming. That afternoon we found the new grave, and determined to begin work soon
after midnight.
It was a repulsive task that we undertook in the black small hours, even though
we lacked at that time the special horror of graveyards which later experiences brought to us.
We carried spades and oil dark lanterns, for although electric torches were then manufactured,
they were not as satisfactory as the tungsten contrivances of today. The process of unearthing
was slow and sordid—it might have been gruesomely poetical if we had been artists instead
of scientists—and we were glad when our spades struck wood. When the pine box was fully
uncovered West scrambled down and removed the lid, dragging out and propping up the contents.
I reached down and hauled the contents out of the grave, and then both toiled hard to restore
the spot to its former appearance. The affair made us rather nervous, especially the stiff form
and vacant face of our first trophy, but we managed to remove all traces of our visit. When
we had patted down the last shovelful of earth we put the specimen in a canvas sack and set
out for the old Chapman place beyond Meadow Hill.
On an improvised dissecting-table in the old farmhouse, by the light of a powerful
acetylene lamp, the specimen was not very spectral looking. It had been a sturdy and apparently
unimaginative youth of wholesome plebeian type—large-framed, grey-eyed, and brown-haired—a
sound animal without psychological subtleties, and probably having vital processes of the simplest
and healthiest sort. Now, with the eyes closed, it looked more asleep than dead; though the
expert test of my friend soon left no doubt on that score. We had at last what West had always
longed for—a real dead man of the ideal kind, ready for the solution as prepared according
to the most careful calculations and theories for human use. The tension on our part became
very great. We knew that there was scarcely a chance for anything like complete success, and
could not avoid hideous fears at possible grotesque results of partial animation. Especially
were we apprehensive concerning the mind and impulses of the creature, since in the space following
death some of the more delicate cerebral cells might well have suffered deterioration. I, myself,
still held some curious notions about the traditional “soul” of man, and felt an
awe at the secrets that might be told by one returning from the dead. I wondered what sights
this placid youth might have seen in inaccessible spheres, and what he could relate if fully
restored to life. But my wonder was not overwhelming, since for the most part I shared the materialism
of my friend. He was calmer than I as he forced a large quantity of his fluid into a vein of
the body’s arm, immediately binding the incision securely.
The waiting was gruesome, but West never faltered. Every now and then he applied
his stethoscope to the specimen, and bore the negative results philosophically. After about
three-quarters of an hour without the least sign of life he disappointedly pronounced the solution
inadequate, but determined to make the most of his opportunity and try one change in the formula
before disposing of his ghastly prize. We had that afternoon dug a grave in the cellar, and
would have to fill it by dawn—for although we had fixed a lock on the house we wished
to shun even the remotest risk of a ghoulish discovery. Besides, the body would not be even approximately
fresh the next night. So taking the solitary acetylene lamp into the adjacent laboratory, we
left our silent guest on the slab in the dark, and bent every energy to the mixing of a new
solution; the weighing and measuring supervised by West with an almost fanatical care.
The awful event was very sudden, and wholly unexpected. I was pouring something
from one test-tube to another, and West was busy over the alcohol blast-lamp which had to answer
for a Bunsen burner in this gasless edifice, when from the pitch-black room we had left there
burst the most appalling and daemoniac succession of cries that either of us had ever heard.
Not more unutterable could have been the chaos of hellish sound if the pit itself had opened
to release the agony of the damned, for in one inconceivable cacophony was centred all the supernal
terror and unnatural despair of animate nature. Human it could not have been—it is not
in man to make such sounds—and without a thought of our late employment or its possible
discovery both West and I leaped to the nearest window like stricken animals; overturning tubes,
lamp, and retorts, and vaulting madly into the starred abyss of the rural night. I think we
screamed ourselves as we stumbled frantically toward the town, though as we reached the outskirts
we put on a semblance of restraint—just enough to seem like belated revellers staggering
home from a debauch.
We did not separate, but managed to get to West’s room, where we whispered
with the gas up until dawn. By then we had calmed ourselves a little with rational theories
and plans for investigation, so that we could sleep through the day—classes being disregarded.
But that evening two items in the paper, wholly unrelated, made it again impossible for us to
sleep. The old deserted Chapman house had inexplicably burned to an amorphous heap of ashes;
that we could understand because of the upset lamp. Also, an attempt had been made to disturb
a new grave in the potter’s field, as if by futile and spadeless clawing at the earth.
That we could not understand, for we had patted down the mould very carefully.
And for seventeen years after that West would look frequently over his shoulder,
and complain of fancied footsteps behind him. Now he has disappeared.
II. The Plague-Daemon

I shall never forget that hideous summer sixteen years ago, when like a noxious afrite from
the halls of Eblis typhoid stalked leeringly through Arkham. It is by that satanic scourge that
most recall the year, for truly terror brooded with bat-wings over the piles of coffins in the
tombs of Christchurch Cemetery; yet for me there is a greater horror in that time—a horror
known to me alone now that Herbert West has disappeared.
West and I were doing post-graduate work in summer classes at the medical school
of Miskatonic University, and my friend had attained a wide notoriety because of his experiments
leading toward the revivification of the dead. After the scientific slaughter of uncounted small
animals the freakish work had ostensibly stopped by order of our sceptical dean, Dr. Allan Halsey;
though West had continued to perform certain secret tests in his dingy boarding-house room,
and had on one terrible and unforgettable occasion taken a human body from its grave in the
potter’s field to a deserted farmhouse beyond Meadow Hill.
I was with him on that odious occasion, and saw him inject into the still veins
the elixir which he thought would to some extent restore life’s chemical and physical
processes. It had ended horribly—in a delirium of fear which we gradually came to attribute
to our own overwrought nerves—and West had never afterward been able to shake off a maddening
sensation of being haunted and hunted. The body had not been quite fresh enough; it is obvious
that to restore normal mental attributes a body must be very fresh indeed; and a burning of
the old house had prevented us from burying the thing. It would have been better if we could
have known it was underground.
After that experience West had dropped his researches for some time; but as
the zeal of the born scientist slowly returned, he again became importunate with the college
faculty, pleading for the use of the dissecting-room and of fresh human specimens for the work
he regarded as so overwhelmingly important. His pleas, however, were wholly in vain; for the
decision of Dr. Halsey was inflexible, and the other professors all endorsed the verdict of
their leader. In the radical theory of reanimation they saw nothing but the immature vagaries
of a youthful enthusiast whose slight form, yellow hair, spectacled blue eyes, and soft voice
gave no hint of the supernormal—almost diabolical—power of the cold brain within.
I can see him now as he was then—and I shiver. He grew sterner of face, but never elderly.
And now Sefton Asylum has had the mishap and West has vanished.
West clashed disagreeably with Dr. Halsey near the end of our last undergraduate
term in a wordy dispute that did less credit to him than to the kindly dean in point of courtesy.
He felt that he was needlessly and irrationally retarded in a supremely great work; a work which
he could of course conduct to suit himself in later years, but which he wished to begin while
still possessed of the exceptional facilities of the university. That the tradition-bound elders
should ignore his singular results on animals, and persist in their denial of the possibility
of reanimation, was inexpressibly disgusting and almost incomprehensible to a youth of West’s
logical temperament. Only greater maturity could help him understand the chronic mental limitations
of the “professor-doctor” type—the product of generations of pathetic Puritanism;
kindly, conscientious, and sometimes gentle and amiable, yet always narrow, intolerant, custom-ridden,
and lacking in perspective. Age has more charity for these incomplete yet high-souled characters,
whose worst real vice is timidity, and who are ultimately punished by general ridicule for their
intellectual sins—sins like Ptolemaism, Calvinism, anti-Darwinism, anti-Nietzscheism,
and every sort of Sabbatarianism and sumptuary legislation. West, young despite his marvellous
scientific acquirements, had scant patience with good Dr. Halsey and his erudite colleagues;
and nursed an increasing resentment, coupled with a desire to prove his theories to these obtuse
worthies in some striking and dramatic fashion. Like most youths, he indulged in elaborate day-dreams
of revenge, triumph, and final magnanimous forgiveness.
And then had come the scourge, grinning and lethal, from the nightmare caverns
of Tartarus. West and I had graduated about the time of its beginning, but had remained for
additional work at the summer school, so that we were in Arkham when it broke with full daemoniac
fury upon the town. Though not as yet licenced physicians, we now had our degrees, and were
pressed frantically into public service as the numbers of the stricken grew. The situation was
almost past management, and deaths ensued too frequently for the local undertakers fully to
handle. Burials without embalming were made in rapid succession, and even the Christchurch Cemetery
receiving tomb was crammed with coffins of the unembalmed dead. This circumstance was not without
effect on West, who thought often of the irony of the situation—so many fresh specimens,
yet none for his persecuted researches! We were frightfully overworked, and the terrific mental
and nervous strain made my friend brood morbidly.
But West’s gentle enemies were no less harassed with prostrating duties.
College had all but closed, and every doctor of the medical faculty was helping to fight the
typhoid plague. Dr. Halsey in particular had distinguished himself in sacrificing service, applying
his extreme skill with whole-hearted energy to cases which many others shunned because of danger
or apparent hopelessness. Before a month was over the fearless dean had become a popular hero,
though he seemed unconscious of his fame as he struggled to keep from collapsing with physical
fatigue and nervous exhaustion. West could not withhold admiration for the fortitude of his
foe, but because of this was even more determined to prove to him the truth of his amazing doctrines.
Taking advantage of the disorganisation of both college work and municipal health regulations,
he managed to get a recently deceased body smuggled into the university dissecting-room one
night, and in my presence injected a new modification of his solution. The thing actually opened
its eyes, but only stared at the ceiling with a look of soul-petrifying horror before collapsing
into an inertness from which nothing could rouse it. West said it was not fresh enough—the
hot summer air does not favour corpses. That time we were almost caught before we incinerated
the thing, and West doubted the advisability of repeating his daring misuse of the college laboratory.
The peak of the epidemic was reached in August. West and I were almost dead,
and Dr. Halsey did die on the 14th. The students all attended the hasty funeral on the 15th,
and bought an impressive wreath, though the latter was quite overshadowed by the tributes sent
by wealthy Arkham citizens and by the municipality itself. It was almost a public affair, for
the dean had surely been a public benefactor. After the entombment we were all somewhat depressed,
and spent the afternoon at the bar of the Commercial House; where West, though shaken by the
death of his chief opponent, chilled the rest of us with references to his notorious theories.
Most of the students went home, or to various duties, as the evening advanced; but West persuaded
me to aid him in “making a night of it”. West’s landlady saw us arrive at
his room about two in the morning, with a third man between us; and told her husband that we
had all evidently dined and wined rather well.
Apparently this acidulous matron was right; for about 3 a.m. the whole house
was aroused by cries coming from West’s room, where when they broke down the door they
found the two of us unconscious on the blood-stained carpet, beaten, scratched, and mauled,
and with the broken remnants of West’s bottles and instruments around us. Only an open
window told what had become of our assailant, and many wondered how he himself had fared after
the terrific leap from the second story to the lawn which he must have made. There were some
strange garments in the room, but West upon regaining consciousness said they did not belong
to the stranger, but were specimens collected for bacteriological analysis in the course of
investigations on the transmission of germ diseases. He ordered them burnt as soon as possible
in the capacious fireplace. To the police we both declared ignorance of our late companion’s
identity. He was, West nervously said, a congenial stranger whom we had met at some downtown
bar of uncertain location. We had all been rather jovial, and West and I did not wish to have
our pugnacious companion hunted down.
That same night saw the beginning of the second Arkham horror—the horror
that to me eclipsed the plague itself. Christchurch Cemetery was the scene of a terrible killing;
a watchman having been clawed to death in a manner not only too hideous for description, but
raising a doubt as to the human agency of the deed. The victim had been seen alive considerably
after midnight—the dawn revealed the unutterable thing. The manager of a circus at the
neighbouring town of Bolton was questioned, but he swore that no beast had at any time escaped
from its cage. Those who found the body noted a trail of blood leading to the receiving tomb,
where a small pool of red lay on the concrete just outside the gate. A fainter trail led away
toward the woods, but it soon gave out.
The next night devils danced on the roofs of Arkham, and unnatural madness
howled in the wind. Through the fevered town had crept a curse which some said was greater than
the plague, and which some whispered was the embodied daemon-soul of the plague itself. Eight
houses were entered by a nameless thing which strewed red death in its wake—in all, seventeen
maimed and shapeless remnants of bodies were left behind by the voiceless, sadistic monster
that crept abroad. A few persons had half seen it in the dark, and said it was white and like
a malformed ape or anthropomorphic fiend. It had not left behind quite all that it had attacked,
for sometimes it had been hungry. The number it had killed was fourteen; three of the bodies
had been in stricken homes and had not been alive.
On the third night frantic bands of searchers, led by the police, captured
it in a house on Crane Street near the Miskatonic campus. They had organised the quest with
care, keeping in touch by means of volunteer telephone stations, and when someone in the college
district had reported hearing a scratching at a shuttered window, the net was quickly spread.
On account of the general alarm and precautions, there were only two more victims, and the capture
was effected without major casualties. The thing was finally stopped by a bullet, though not
a fatal one, and was rushed to the local hospital amidst universal excitement and loathing.
For it had been a man. This much was clear despite the nauseous eyes, the voiceless
simianism, and the daemoniac savagery. They dressed its wound and carted it to the asylum at
Sefton, where it beat its head against the walls of a padded cell for sixteen years—until
the recent mishap, when it escaped under circumstances that few like to mention. What had most
disgusted the searchers of Arkham was the thing they noticed when the monster’s face was
cleaned—the mocking, unbelievable resemblance to a learned and self-sacrificing martyr
who had been entombed but three days before—the late Dr. Allan Halsey, public benefactor
and dean of the medical school of Miskatonic University.
To the vanished Herbert West and to me the disgust and horror were supreme.
I shudder tonight as I think of it; shudder even more than I did that morning when West muttered
through his bandages,
“Damn it, it wasn’t quite fresh enough!”
III. Six Shots by Midnight

It is uncommon to fire all six shots of a revolver with great suddenness when one would probably
be sufficient, but many things in the life of Herbert West were uncommon. It is, for instance,
not often that a young physician leaving college is obliged to conceal the principles which
guide his selection of a home and office, yet that was the case with Herbert West. When he and
I obtained our degrees at the medical school of Miskatonic University, and sought to relieve
our poverty by setting up as general practitioners, we took great care not to say that we chose
our house because it was fairly well isolated, and as near as possible to the potter’s
field.
Reticence such as this is seldom without a cause, nor indeed was ours; for
our requirements were those resulting from a life-work distinctly unpopular. Outwardly we were
doctors only, but beneath the surface were aims of far greater and more terrible moment—for
the essence of Herbert West’s existence was a quest amid black and forbidden realms of
the unknown, in which he hoped to uncover the secret of life and restore to perpetual animation
the graveyard’s cold clay. Such a quest demands strange materials, among them fresh human
bodies; and in order to keep supplied with these indispensable things one must live quietly
and not far from a place of informal interment.
West and I had met in college, and I had been the only one to sympathise with
his hideous experiments. Gradually I had come to be his inseparable assistant, and now that
we were out of college we had to keep together. It was not easy to find a good opening for two
doctors in company, but finally the influence of the university secured us a practice in Bolton—a
factory town near Arkham, the seat of the college. The Bolton Worsted Mills are the largest
in the Miskatonic Valley, and their polyglot employees are never popular as patients with the
local physicians. We chose our house with the greatest care, seizing at last on a rather run-down
cottage near the end of Pond Street; five numbers from the closest neighbour, and separated
from the local potter’s field by only a stretch of meadow land, bisected by a narrow neck
of the rather dense forest which lies to the north. The distance was greater than we wished,
but we could get no nearer house without going on the other side of the field, wholly out of
the factory district. We were not much displeased, however, since there were no people between
us and our sinister source of supplies. The walk was a trifle long, but we could haul our silent
specimens undisturbed.
Our practice was surprisingly large from the very first—large enough
to please most young doctors, and large enough to prove a bore and a burden to students whose
real interest lay elsewhere. The mill-hands were of somewhat turbulent inclinations; and besides
their many natural needs, their frequent clashes and stabbing affrays gave us plenty to do.
But what actually absorbed our minds was the secret laboratory we had fitted up in the cellar—the
laboratory with the long table under the electric lights, where in the small hours of the morning
we often injected West’s various solutions into the veins of the things we dragged from
the potter’s field. West was experimenting madly to find something which would start man’s
vital motions anew after they had been stopped by the thing we call death, but had encountered
the most ghastly obstacles. The solution had to be differently compounded for different types—what
would serve for guinea-pigs would not serve for human beings, and different human specimens
required large modifications.
The bodies had to be exceedingly fresh, or the slight decomposition of brain
tissue would render perfect reanimation impossible. Indeed, the greatest problem was to get
them fresh enough—West had had horrible experiences during his secret college researches
with corpses of doubtful vintage. The results of partial or imperfect animation were much more
hideous than were the total failures, and we both held fearsome recollections of such things.
Ever since our first daemoniac session in the deserted farmhouse on Meadow Hill in Arkham, we
had felt a brooding menace; and West, though a calm, blond, blue-eyed scientific automaton in
most respects, often confessed to a shuddering sensation of stealthy pursuit. He half felt that
he was followed—a psychological delusion of shaken nerves, enhanced by the undeniably
disturbing fact that at least one of our reanimated specimens was still alive—a frightful
carnivorous thing in a padded cell at Sefton. Then there was another—our first—whose
exact fate we had never learned.
We had fair luck with specimens in Bolton—much better than in Arkham.
We had not been settled a week before we got an accident victim on the very night of burial,
and made it open its eyes with an amazingly rational expression before the solution failed.
It had lost an arm—if it had been a perfect body we might have succeeded better. Between
then and the next January we secured three more; one total failure, one case of marked muscular
motion, and one rather shivery thing—it rose of itself and uttered a sound. Then came
a period when luck was poor; interments fell off, and those that did occur were of specimens
either too diseased or too maimed for use. We kept track of all the deaths and their circumstances
with systematic care.
One March night, however, we unexpectedly obtained a specimen which did not
come from the potter’s field. In Bolton the prevailing spirit of Puritanism had outlawed
the sport of boxing—with the usual result. Surreptitious and ill-conducted bouts among
the mill-workers were common, and occasionally professional talent of low grade was imported.
This late winter night there had been such a match; evidently with disastrous results, since
two timorous Poles had come to us with incoherently whispered entreaties to attend to a very
secret and desperate case. We followed them to an abandoned barn, where the remnants of a crowd
of frightened foreigners were watching a silent black form on the floor.
The match had been between Kid O’Brien—a lubberly and now quaking
youth with a most un-Hibernian hooked nose—and Buck Robinson, “The Harlem Smoke”.
The negro had been knocked out, and a moment’s examination shewed us that he would permanently
remain so. He was a loathsome, gorilla-like thing, with abnormally long arms which I could not
help calling fore legs, and a face that conjured up thoughts of unspeakable Congo secrets and
tom-tom poundings under an eerie moon. The body must have looked even worse in life—but
the world holds many ugly things. Fear was upon the whole pitiful crowd, for they did not know
what the law would exact of them if the affair were not hushed up; and they were grateful when
West, in spite of my involuntary shudders, offered to get rid of the thing quietly—for
a purpose I knew too well.
There was bright moonlight over the snowless landscape, but we dressed the
thing and carried it home between us through the deserted streets and meadows, as we had carried
a similar thing one horrible night in Arkham. We approached the house from the field in the
rear, took the specimen in the back door and down the cellar stairs, and prepared it for the
usual experiment. Our fear of the police was absurdly great, though we had timed our trip to
avoid the solitary patrolman of that section.
The result was wearily anticlimactic. Ghastly as our prize appeared, it was
wholly unresponsive to every solution we injected in its black arm; solutions prepared from
experience with white specimens only. So as the hour grew dangerously near to dawn, we did as
we had done with the others—dragged the thing across the meadows to the neck of the woods
near the potter’s field, and buried it there in the best sort of grave the frozen ground
would furnish. The grave was not very deep, but fully as good as that of the previous specimen—the
thing which had risen of itself and uttered a sound. In the light of our dark lanterns we carefully
covered it with leaves and dead vines, fairly certain that the police would never find it in
a forest so dim and dense.
The next day I was increasingly apprehensive about the police, for a patient
brought rumours of a suspected fight and death. West had still another source of worry, for
he had been called in the afternoon to a case which ended very threateningly. An Italian woman
had become hysterical over her missing child—a lad of five who had strayed off early in
the morning and failed to appear for dinner—and had developed symptoms highly alarming
in view of an always weak heart. It was a very foolish hysteria, for the boy had often run away
before; but Italian peasants are exceedingly superstitious, and this woman seemed as much harassed
by omens as by facts. About seven o’clock in the evening she had died, and her frantic
husband had made a frightful scene in his efforts to kill West, whom he wildly blamed for not
saving her life. Friends had held him when he drew a stiletto, but West departed amidst his
inhuman shrieks, curses, and oaths of vengeance. In his latest affliction the fellow seemed
to have forgotten his child, who was still missing as the night advanced. There was some talk
of searching the woods, but most of the family’s friends were busy with the dead woman
and the screaming man. Altogether, the nervous strain upon West must have been tremendous. Thoughts
of the police and of the mad Italian both weighed heavily.
We retired about eleven, but I did not sleep well. Bolton had a surprisingly
good police force for so small a town, and I could not help fearing the mess which would ensue
if the affair of the night before were ever tracked down. It might mean the end of all our local
work—and perhaps prison for both West and me. I did not like those rumours of a fight
which were floating about. After the clock had struck three the moon shone in my eyes, but I
turned over without rising to pull down the shade. Then came the steady rattling at the back
door.
I lay still and somewhat dazed, but before long heard West’s rap on my
door. He was clad in dressing-gown and slippers, and had in his hands a revolver and an electric
flashlight. From the revolver I knew that he was thinking more of the crazed Italian than of
the police.
“We’d better both go,” he whispered. “It wouldn’t
do not to answer it anyway, and it may be a patient—it would be like one of those fools
to try the back door.”
So we both went down the stairs on tiptoe, with a fear partly justified and
partly that which comes only from the soul of the weird small hours. The rattling continued,
growing somewhat louder. When we reached the door I cautiously unbolted it and threw it open,
and as the moon streamed revealingly down on the form silhouetted there, West did a peculiar
thing. Despite the obvious danger of attracting notice and bringing down on our heads the dreaded
police investigation—a thing which after all was mercifully averted by the relative isolation
of our cottage—my friend suddenly, excitedly, and unnecessarily emptied all six chambers
of his revolver into the nocturnal visitor.
For that visitor was neither Italian nor policeman. Looming hideously against
the spectral moon was a gigantic misshapen thing not to be imagined save in nightmares—a
glassy-eyed, ink-black apparition nearly on all fours, covered with bits of mould, leaves, and
vines, foul with caked blood, and having between its glistening teeth a snow-white, terrible,
cylindrical object terminating in a tiny hand.
IV. The Scream of the Dead

The scream of a dead man gave to me that acute and added horror of Dr. Herbert West which harassed
the latter years of our companionship. It is natural that such a thing as a dead man’s
scream should give horror, for it is obviously not a pleasing or ordinary occurrence; but I
was used to similar experiences, hence suffered on this occasion only because of a particular
circumstance. And, as I have implied, it was not of the dead man himself that I became afraid.
Herbert West, whose associate and assistant I was, possessed scientific interests
far beyond the usual routine of a village physician. That was why, when establishing his practice
in Bolton, he had chosen an isolated house near the potter’s field. Briefly and brutally
stated, West’s sole absorbing interest was a secret study of the phenomena of life and
its cessation, leading toward the reanimation of the dead through injections of an excitant
solution. For this ghastly experimenting it was necessary to have a constant supply of very
fresh human bodies; very fresh because even the least decay hopelessly damaged the brain structure,
and human because we found that the solution had to be compounded differently for different
types of organisms. Scores of rabbits and guinea-pigs had been killed and treated, but their
trail was a blind one. West had never fully succeeded because he had never been able to secure
a corpse sufficiently fresh. What he wanted were bodies from which vitality had only just departed;
bodies with every cell intact and capable of receiving again the impulse toward that mode of
motion called life. There was hope that this second and artificial life might be made perpetual
by repetitions of the injection, but we had learned that an ordinary natural life would not
respond to the action. To establish the artificial motion, natural life must be extinct—the
specimens must be very fresh, but genuinely dead.
The awesome quest had begun when West and I were students at the Miskatonic
University Medical School in Arkham, vividly conscious for the first time of the thoroughly
mechanical nature of life. That was seven years before, but West looked scarcely a day older
now—he was small, blond, clean-shaven, soft-voiced, and spectacled, with only an occasional
flash of a cold blue eye to tell of the hardening and growing fanaticism of his character under
the pressure of his terrible investigations. Our experiences had often been hideous in the extreme;
the results of defective reanimation, when lumps of graveyard clay had been galvanised into
morbid, unnatural, and brainless motion by various modifications of the vital solution.
One thing had uttered a nerve-shattering scream; another had risen violently,
beaten us both to unconsciousness, and run amuck in a shocking way before it could be placed
behind asylum bars; still another, a loathsome African monstrosity, had clawed out of its shallow
grave and done a deed—West had had to shoot that object. We could not get bodies fresh
enough to shew any trace of reason when reanimated, so had perforce created nameless horrors.
It was disturbing to think that one, perhaps two, of our monsters still lived—that thought
haunted us shadowingly, till finally West disappeared under frightful circumstances. But at
the time of the scream in the cellar laboratory of the isolated Bolton cottage, our fears were
subordinate to our anxiety for extremely fresh specimens. West was more avid than I, so that
it almost seemed to me that he looked half-covetously at any very healthy living physique.
It was in July, 1910, that the bad luck regarding specimens began to turn.
I had been on a long visit to my parents in Illinois, and upon my return found West in a state
of singular elation. He had, he told me excitedly, in all likelihood solved the problem of freshness
through an approach from an entirely new angle—that of artificial preservation. I had
known that he was working on a new and highly unusual embalming compound, and was not surprised
that it had turned out well; but until he explained the details I was rather puzzled as to how
such a compound could help in our work, since the objectionable staleness of the specimens was
largely due to delay occurring before we secured them. This, I now saw, West had clearly recognised;
creating his embalming compound for future rather than immediate use, and trusting to fate to
supply again some very recent and unburied corpse, as it had years before when we obtained the
negro killed in the Bolton prize-fight. At last fate had been kind, so that on this occasion
there lay in the secret cellar laboratory a corpse whose decay could not by any possibility
have begun. What would happen on reanimation, and whether we could hope for a revival of mind
and reason, West did not venture to predict. The experiment would be a landmark in our studies,
and he had saved the new body for my return, so that both might share the spectacle in accustomed
fashion.
West told me how he had obtained the specimen. It had been a vigorous man;
a well-dressed stranger just off the train on his way to transact some business with the Bolton
Worsted Mills. The walk through the town had been long, and by the time the traveller paused
at our cottage to ask the way to the factories his heart had become greatly overtaxed. He had
refused a stimulant, and had suddenly dropped dead only a moment later. The body, as might be
expected, seemed to West a heaven-sent gift. In his brief conversation the stranger had made
it clear that he was unknown in Bolton, and a search of his pockets subsequently revealed him
to be one Robert Leavitt of St. Louis, apparently without a family to make instant inquiries
about his disappearance. If this man could not be restored to life, no one would know of our
experiment. We buried our materials in a dense strip of woods between the house and the potter’s
field. If, on the other hand, he could be restored, our fame would be brilliantly and perpetually
established. So without delay West had injected into the body’s wrist the compound which
would hold it fresh for use after my arrival. The matter of the presumably weak heart, which
to my mind imperiled the success of our experiment, did not appear to trouble West extensively.
He hoped at last to obtain what he had never obtained before—a rekindled spark of reason
and perhaps a normal, living creature.
So on the night of July 18, 1910, Herbert West and I stood in the cellar laboratory
and gazed at a white, silent figure beneath the dazzling arc-light. The embalming compound had
worked uncannily well, for as I stared fascinatedly at the sturdy frame which had lain two weeks
without stiffening I was moved to seek West’s assurance that the thing was really dead.
This assurance he gave readily enough; reminding me that the reanimating solution was never
used without careful tests as to life; since it could have no effect if any of the original
vitality were present. As West proceeded to take preliminary steps, I was impressed by the vast
intricacy of the new experiment; an intricacy so vast that he could trust no hand less delicate
than his own. Forbidding me to touch the body, he first injected a drug in the wrist just beside
the place his needle had punctured when injecting the embalming compound. This, he said, was
to neutralise the compound and release the system to a normal relaxation so that the reanimating
solution might freely work when injected. Slightly later, when a change and a gentle tremor
seemed to affect the dead limbs, West stuffed a pillow-like object violently over the twitching
face, not withdrawing it until the corpse appeared quiet and ready for our attempt at reanimation.
The pale enthusiast now applied some last perfunctory tests for absolute lifelessness, withdrew
satisfied, and finally injected into the left arm an accurately measured amount of the vital
elixir, prepared during the afternoon with a greater care than we had used since college days,
when our feats were new and groping. I cannot express the wild, breathless suspense with which
we waited for results on this first really fresh specimen—the first we could reasonably
expect to open its lips in rational speech, perhaps to tell of what it had seen beyond the unfathomable
abyss.
West was a materialist, believing in no soul and attributing all the working
of consciousness to bodily phenomena; consequently he looked for no revelation of hideous secrets
from gulfs and caverns beyond death’s barrier. I did not wholly disagree with him theoretically,
yet held vague instinctive remnants of the primitive faith of my forefathers; so that I could
not help eyeing the corpse with a certain amount of awe and terrible expectation. Besides—I
could not extract from my memory that hideous, inhuman shriek we heard on the night we tried
our first experiment in the deserted farmhouse at Arkham.
Very little time had elapsed before I saw the attempt was not to be a total
failure. A touch of colour came to cheeks hitherto chalk-white, and spread out under the curiously
ample stubble of sandy beard. West, who had his hand on the pulse of the left wrist, suddenly
nodded significantly; and almost simultaneously a mist appeared on the mirror inclined above
the body’s mouth. There followed a few spasmodic muscular motions, and then an audible
breathing and visible motion of the chest. I looked at the closed eyelids, and thought I detected
a quivering. Then the lids opened, shewing eyes which were grey, calm, and alive, but still
unintelligent and not even curious.
In a moment of fantastic whim I whispered questions to the reddening ears;
questions of other worlds of which the memory might still be present. Subsequent terror drove
them from my mind, but I think the last one, which I repeated, was: “Where have you been?”
I do not yet know whether I was answered or not, for no sound came from the well-shaped mouth;
but I do know that at that moment I firmly thought the thin lips moved silently, forming syllables
I would have vocalised as “only now” if that phrase had possessed any sense or relevancy.
At that moment, as I say, I was elated with the conviction that the one great goal had been
attained; and that for the first time a reanimated corpse had uttered distinct words impelled
by actual reason. In the next moment there was no doubt about the triumph; no doubt that the
solution had truly accomplished, at least temporarily, its full mission of restoring rational
and articulate life to the dead. But in that triumph there came to me the greatest of all horrors—not
horror of the thing that spoke, but of the deed that I had witnessed and of the man with whom
my professional fortunes were joined.
For that very fresh body, at last writhing into full and terrifying consciousness
with eyes dilated at the memory of its last scene on earth, threw out its frantic hands in a
life and death struggle with the air; and suddenly collapsing into a second and final dissolution
from which there could be no return, screamed out the cry that will ring eternally in my aching
brain:
“Help! Keep off, you cursed little tow-head fiend—keep that damned
needle away from me!”
V. The Horror from the Shadows

Many men have related hideous things, not mentioned in print, which happened on the battlefields
of the Great War. Some of these things have made me faint, others have convulsed me with devastating
nausea, while still others have made me tremble and look behind me in the dark; yet despite
the worst of them I believe I can myself relate the most hideous thing of all—the shocking,
the unnatural, the unbelievable horror from the shadows.
In 1915 I was a physician with the rank of First Lieutenant in a Canadian regiment
in Flanders, one of many Americans to precede the government itself into the gigantic struggle.
I had not entered the army on my own initiative, but rather as a natural result of the enlistment
of the man whose indispensable assistant I was—the celebrated Boston surgical specialist,
Dr. Herbert West. Dr. West had been avid for a chance to serve as surgeon in a great war, and
when the chance had come he carried me with him almost against my will. There were reasons why
I would have been glad to let the war separate us; reasons why I found the practice of medicine
and the companionship of West more and more irritating; but when he had gone to Ottawa and through
a colleague’s influence secured a medical commission as Major, I could not resist the
imperious persuasion of one determined that I should accompany him in my usual capacity.
When I say that Dr. West was avid to serve in battle, I do not mean to imply
that he was either naturally warlike or anxious for the safety of civilisation. Always an ice-cold
intellectual machine; slight, blond, blue-eyed, and spectacled; I think he secretly sneered
at my occasional martial enthusiasms and censures of supine neutrality. There was, however,
something he wanted in embattled Flanders; and in order to secure it he had to assume a military
exterior. What he wanted was not a thing which many persons want, but something connected with
the peculiar branch of medical science which he had chosen quite clandestinely to follow, and
in which he had achieved amazing and occasionally hideous results. It was, in fact, nothing
more or less than an abundant supply of freshly killed men in every stage of dismemberment.
Herbert West needed fresh bodies because his life-work was the reanimation
of the dead. This work was not known to the fashionable clientele who had so swiftly built up
his fame after his arrival in Boston; but was only too well known to me, who had been his closest
friend and sole assistant since the old days in Miskatonic University Medical School at Arkham.
It was in those college days that he had begun his terrible experiments, first on small animals
and then on human bodies shockingly obtained. There was a solution which he injected into the
veins of dead things, and if they were fresh enough they responded in strange ways. He had had
much trouble in discovering the proper formula, for each type of organism was found to need
a stimulus especially adapted to it. Terror stalked him when he reflected on his partial failures;
nameless things resulting from imperfect solutions or from bodies insufficiently fresh. A certain
number of these failures had remained alive—one was in an asylum while others had vanished—and
as he thought of conceivable yet virtually impossible eventualities he often shivered beneath
his usual stolidity.
West had soon learned that absolute freshness was the prime requisite for useful
specimens, and had accordingly resorted to frightful and unnatural expedients in body-snatching.
In college, and during our early practice together in the factory town of Bolton, my attitude
toward him had been largely one of fascinated admiration; but as his boldness in methods grew,
I began to develop a gnawing fear. I did not like the way he looked at healthy living bodies;
and then there came a nightmarish session in the cellar laboratory when I learned that a certain
specimen had been a living body when he secured it. That was the first time he had ever been
able to revive the quality of rational thought in a corpse; and his success, obtained at such
a loathsome cost, had completely hardened him.
Of his methods in the intervening five years I dare not speak. I was held to
him by sheer force of fear, and witnessed sights that no human tongue could repeat. Gradually
I came to find Herbert West himself more horrible than anything he did—that was when it
dawned on me that his once normal scientific zeal for prolonging life had subtly degenerated
into a mere morbid and ghoulish curiosity and secret sense of charnel picturesqueness. His interest
became a hellish and perverse addiction to the repellently and fiendishly abnormal; he gloated
calmly over artificial monstrosities which would make most healthy men drop dead from fright
and disgust; he became, behind his pallid intellectuality, a fastidious Baudelaire of physical
experiment—a languid Elagabalus of the tombs.
Dangers he met unflinchingly; crimes he committed unmoved. I think the climax
came when he had proved his point that rational life can be restored, and had sought new worlds
to conquer by experimenting on the reanimation of detached parts of bodies. He had wild and
original ideas on the independent vital properties of organic cells and nerve-tissue separated
from natural physiological systems; and achieved some hideous preliminary results in the form
of never-dying, artificially nourished tissue obtained from the nearly hatched eggs of an indescribable
tropical reptile. Two biological points he was exceedingly anxious to settle—first, whether
any amount of consciousness and rational action be possible without the brain, proceeding from
the spinal cord and various nerve-centres; and second, whether any kind of ethereal, intangible
relation distinct from the material cells may exist to link the surgically separated parts of
what has previously been a single living organism. All this research work required a prodigious
supply of freshly slaughtered human flesh—and that was why Herbert West had entered the
Great War.
The phantasmal, unmentionable thing occurred one midnight late in March, 1915,
in a field hospital behind the lines at St. Eloi. I wonder even now if it could have been other
than a daemoniac dream of delirium. West had a private laboratory in an east room of the barn-like
temporary edifice, assigned him on his plea that he was devising new and radical methods for
the treatment of hitherto hopeless cases of maiming. There he worked like a butcher in the midst
of his gory wares—I could never get used to the levity with which he handled and classified
certain things. At times he actually did perform marvels of surgery for the soldiers; but his
chief delights were of a less public and philanthropic kind, requiring many explanations of
sounds which seemed peculiar even amidst that babel of the damned. Among these sounds were frequent
revolver-shots—surely not uncommon on a battlefield, but distinctly uncommon in an hospital.
Dr. West’s reanimated specimens were not meant for long existence or a large audience.
Besides human tissue, West employed much of the reptile embryo tissue which he had cultivated
with such singular results. It was better than human material for maintaining life in organless
fragments, and that was now my friend’s chief activity. In a dark corner of the laboratory,
over a queer incubating burner, he kept a large covered vat full of this reptilian cell-matter;
which multiplied and grew puffily and hideously.
On the night of which I speak we had a splendid new specimen—a man at
once physically powerful and of such high mentality that a sensitive nervous system was assured.
It was rather ironic, for he was the officer who had helped West to his commission, and who
was now to have been our associate. Moreover, he had in the past secretly studied the theory
of reanimation to some extent under West. Major Sir Eric Moreland Clapham-Lee, D.S.O., was the
greatest surgeon in our division, and had been hastily assigned to the St. Eloi sector when
news of the heavy fighting reached headquarters. He had come in an aëroplane piloted by
the intrepid Lieut. Ronald Hill, only to be shot down when directly over his destination. The
fall had been spectacular and awful; Hill was unrecognisable afterward, but the wreck yielded
up the great surgeon in a nearly decapitated but otherwise intact condition. West had greedily
seized the lifeless thing which had once been his friend and fellow-scholar; and I shuddered
when he finished severing the head, placed it in his hellish vat of pulpy reptile-tissue to
preserve it for future experiments, and proceeded to treat the decapitated body on the operating
table. He injected new blood, joined certain veins, arteries, and nerves at the headless neck,
and closed the ghastly aperture with engrafted skin from an unidentified specimen which had
borne an officer’s uniform. I knew what he wanted—to see if this highly organised
body could exhibit, without its head, any of the signs of mental life which had distinguished
Sir Eric Moreland Clapham-Lee. Once a student of reanimation, this silent trunk was now gruesomely
called upon to exemplify it.
I can still see Herbert West under the sinister electric light as he injected
his reanimating solution into the arm of the headless body. The scene I cannot describe—I
should faint if I tried it, for there is madness in a room full of classified charnel things,
with blood and lesser human debris almost ankle-deep on the slimy floor, and with hideous reptilian
abnormalities sprouting, bubbling, and baking over a winking bluish-green spectre of dim flame
in a far corner of black shadows.
The specimen, as West repeatedly observed, had a splendid nervous system. Much
was expected of it; and as a few twitching motions began to appear, I could see the feverish
interest on West’s face. He was ready, I think, to see proof of his increasingly strong
opinion that consciousness, reason, and personality can exist independently of the brain—that
man has no central connective spirit, but is merely a machine of nervous matter, each section
more or less complete in itself. In one triumphant demonstration West was about to relegate
the mystery of life to the category of myth. The body now twitched more vigorously, and beneath
our avid eyes commenced to heave in a frightful way. The arms stirred disquietingly, the legs
drew up, and various muscles contracted in a repulsive kind of writhing. Then the headless thing
threw out its arms in a gesture which was unmistakably one of desperation—an intelligent
desperation apparently sufficient to prove every theory of Herbert West. Certainly, the nerves
were recalling the man’s last act in life; the struggle to get free of the falling aëroplane.
What followed, I shall never positively know. It may have been wholly an hallucination
from the shock caused at that instant by the sudden and complete destruction of the building
in a cataclysm of German shell-fire—who can gainsay it, since West and I were the only
proved survivors? West liked to think that before his recent disappearance, but there were times
when he could not; for it was queer that we both had the same hallucination. The hideous occurrence
itself was very simple, notable only for what it implied.
The body on the table had risen with a blind and terrible groping, and we had
heard a sound. I should not call that sound a voice, for it was too awful. And yet its timbre
was not the most awful thing about it. Neither was its message—it had merely screamed,
“Jump, Ronald, for God’s sake, jump!” The awful thing was its source.
For it had come from the large covered vat in that ghoulish corner of crawling
black shadows.
VI. The Tomb-Legions

When Dr. Herbert West disappeared a year ago, the Boston police questioned me closely. They
suspected that I was holding something back, and perhaps suspected graver things; but I could
not tell them the truth because they would not have believed it. They knew, indeed, that West
had been connected with activities beyond the credence of ordinary men; for his hideous experiments
in the reanimation of dead bodies had long been too extensive to admit of perfect secrecy; but
the final soul-shattering catastrophe held elements of daemoniac phantasy which make even me
doubt the reality of what I saw.
I was West’s closest friend and only confidential assistant. We had met
years before, in medical school, and from the first I had shared his terrible researches. He
had slowly tried to perfect a solution which, injected into the veins of the newly deceased,
would restore life; a labour demanding an abundance of fresh corpses and therefore involving
the most unnatural actions. Still more shocking were the products of some of the experiments—grisly
masses of flesh that had been dead, but that West waked to a blind, brainless, nauseous animation.
These were the usual results, for in order to reawaken the mind it was necessary to have specimens
so absolutely fresh that no decay could possibly affect the delicate brain-cells.
This need for very fresh corpses had been West’s moral undoing. They
were hard to get, and one awful day he had secured his specimen while it was still alive and
vigorous. A struggle, a needle, and a powerful alkaloid had transformed it to a very fresh corpse,
and the experiment had succeeded for a brief and memorable moment; but West had emerged with
a soul calloused and seared, and a hardened eye which sometimes glanced with a kind of hideous
and calculating appraisal at men of especially sensitive brain and especially vigorous physique.
Toward the last I became acutely afraid of West, for he began to look at me that way. People
did not seem to notice his glances, but they noticed my fear; and after his disappearance used
that as a basis for some absurd suspicions.
West, in reality, was more afraid than I; for his abominable pursuits entailed
a life of furtiveness and dread of every shadow. Partly it was the police he feared; but sometimes
his nervousness was deeper and more nebulous, touching on certain indescribable things into
which he had injected a morbid life, and from which he had not seen that life depart. He usually
finished his experiments with a revolver, but a few times he had not been quick enough. There
was that first specimen on whose rifled grave marks of clawing were later seen. There was also
that Arkham professor’s body which had done cannibal things before it had been captured
and thrust unidentified into a madhouse cell at Sefton, where it beat the walls for sixteen
years. Most of the other possibly surviving results were things less easy to speak of—for
in later years West’s scientific zeal had degenerated to an unhealthy and fantastic mania,
and he had spent his chief skill in vitalising not entire human bodies but isolated parts of
bodies, or parts joined to organic matter other than human. It had become fiendishly disgusting
by the time he disappeared; many of the experiments could not even be hinted at in print. The
Great War, through which both of us served as surgeons, had intensified this side of West.
In saying that West’s fear of his specimens was nebulous, I have in mind
particularly its complex nature. Part of it came merely from knowing of the existence of such
nameless monsters, while another part arose from apprehension of the bodily harm they might
under certain circumstances do him. Their disappearance added horror to the situation—of
them all West knew the whereabouts of only one, the pitiful asylum thing. Then there was a more
subtle fear—a very fantastic sensation resulting from a curious experiment in the Canadian
army in 1915. West, in the midst of a severe battle, had reanimated Major Sir Eric Moreland
Clapham-Lee, D.S.O., a fellow-physician who knew about his experiments and could have duplicated
them. The head had been removed, so that the possibilities of quasi-intelligent life in the
trunk might be investigated. Just as the building was wiped out by a German shell, there had
been a success. The trunk had moved intelligently; and, unbelievable to relate, we were both
sickeningly sure that articulate sounds had come from the detached head as it lay in a shadowy
corner of the laboratory. The shell had been merciful, in a way—but West could never feel
as certain as he wished, that we two were the only survivors. He used to make shuddering conjectures
about the possible actions of a headless physician with the power of reanimating the dead.
West’s last quarters were in a venerable house of much elegance, overlooking
one of the oldest burying-grounds in Boston. He had chosen the place for purely symbolic and
fantastically aesthetic reasons, since most of the interments were of the colonial period and
therefore of little use to a scientist seeking very fresh bodies. The laboratory was in a sub-cellar
secretly constructed by imported workmen, and contained a huge incinerator for the quiet and
complete disposal of such bodies, or fragments and synthetic mockeries of bodies, as might remain
from the morbid experiments and unhallowed amusements of the owner. During the excavation of
this cellar the workmen had struck some exceedingly ancient masonry; undoubtedly connected with
the old burying-ground, yet far too deep to correspond with any known sepulchre therein. After
a number of calculations West decided that it represented some secret chamber beneath the tomb
of the Averills, where the last interment had been made in 1768. I was with him when he studied
the nitrous, dripping walls laid bare by the spades and mattocks of the men, and was prepared
for the gruesome thrill which would attend the uncovering of centuried grave-secrets; but for
the first time West’s new timidity conquered his natural curiosity, and he betrayed his
degenerating fibre by ordering the masonry left intact and plastered over. Thus it remained
till that final hellish night; part of the walls of the secret laboratory. I speak of West’s
decadence, but must add that it was a purely mental and intangible thing. Outwardly he was the
same to the last—calm, cold, slight, and yellow-haired, with spectacled blue eyes and
a general aspect of youth which years and fears seemed never to change. He seemed calm even
when he thought of that clawed grave and looked over his shoulder; even when he thought of the
carnivorous thing that gnawed and pawed at Sefton bars.
The end of Herbert West began one evening in our joint study when he was dividing
his curious glance between the newspaper and me. A strange headline item had struck at him from
the crumpled pages, and a nameless titan claw had seemed to reach down through sixteen years.
Something fearsome and incredible had happened at Sefton Asylum fifty miles away, stunning the
neighbourhood and baffling the police. In the small hours of the morning a body of silent men
had entered the grounds and their leader had aroused the attendants. He was a menacing military
figure who talked without moving his lips and whose voice seemed almost ventriloquially connected
with an immense black case he carried. His expressionless face was handsome to the point of
radiant beauty, but had shocked the superintendent when the hall light fell on it—for
it was a wax face with eyes of painted glass. Some nameless accident had befallen this man.
A larger man guided his steps; a repellent hulk whose bluish face seemed half eaten away by
some unknown malady. The speaker had asked for the custody of the cannibal monster committed
from Arkham sixteen years before; and upon being refused, gave a signal which precipitated a
shocking riot. The fiends had beaten, trampled, and bitten every attendant who did not flee;
killing four and finally succeeding in the liberation of the monster. Those victims who could
recall the event without hysteria swore that the creatures had acted less like men than like
unthinkable automata guided by the wax-faced leader. By the time help could be summoned, every
trace of the men and of their mad charge had vanished.
From the hour of reading this item until midnight, West sat almost paralysed.
At midnight the doorbell rang, startling him fearfully. All the servants were asleep in the
attic, so I answered the bell. As I have told the police, there was no wagon in the street;
but only a group of strange-looking figures bearing a large square box which they deposited
in the hallway after one of them had grunted in a highly unnatural voice, “Express—prepaid.”
They filed out of the house with a jerky tread, and as I watched them go I had an odd idea that
they were turning toward the ancient cemetery on which the back of the house abutted. When I
slammed the door after them West came downstairs and looked at the box. It was about two feet
square, and bore West’s correct name and present address. It also bore the inscription,
“From Eric Moreland Clapham-Lee, St. Eloi, Flanders”. Six years before, in Flanders,
a shelled hospital had fallen upon the headless reanimated trunk of Dr. Clapham-Lee, and upon
the detached head which—perhaps—had uttered articulate sounds.
West was not even excited now. His condition was more ghastly. Quickly he said,
“It’s the finish—but let’s incinerate—this.” We carried
the thing down to the laboratory—listening. I do not remember many particulars—you
can imagine my state of mind—but it is a vicious lie to say it was Herbert West’s
body which I put into the incinerator. We both inserted the whole unopened wooden box, closed
the door, and started the electricity. Nor did any sound come from the box, after all.
It was West who first noticed the falling plaster on that part of the wall
where the ancient tomb masonry had been covered up. I was going to run, but he stopped me. Then
I saw a small black aperture, felt a ghoulish wind of ice, and smelled the charnel bowels of
a putrescent earth. There was no sound, but just then the electric lights went out and I saw
outlined against some phosphorescence of the nether world a horde of silent toiling things which
only insanity—or worse—could create. Their outlines were human, semi-human, fractionally
human, and not human at all—the horde was grotesquely heterogeneous. They were removing
the stones quietly, one by one, from the centuried wall. And then, as the breach became large
enough, they came out into the laboratory in single file; led by a stalking thing with a beautiful
head made of wax. A sort of mad-eyed monstrosity behind the leader seized on Herbert West. West
did not resist or utter a sound. Then they all sprang at him and tore him to pieces before my
eyes, bearing the fragments away into that subterranean vault of fabulous abominations. West’s
head was carried off by the wax-headed leader, who wore a Canadian officer’s uniform.
As it disappeared I saw that the blue eyes behind the spectacles were hideously blazing with
their first touch of frantic, visible emotion.
Servants found me unconscious in the morning. West was gone. The incinerator
contained only unidentifiable ashes. Detectives have questioned me, but what can I say? The
Sefton tragedy they will not connect with West; not that, nor the men with the box, whose existence
they deny. I told them of the vault, and they pointed to the unbroken plaster wall and laughed.
So I told them no more. They imply that I am a madman or a murderer—probably I am mad.
But I might not be mad if those accursed tomb-legions had not been so silent.


In the Vault

Dedicated to C. W. Smith,from whose suggestion the central situation is
taken.

There is nothing more absurd, as I view it, than that conventional association of the homely
and the wholesome which seems to pervade the psychology of the multitude. Mention a bucolic
Yankee setting, a bungling and thick-fibred village undertaker, and a careless mishap in a tomb,
and no average reader can be brought to expect more than a hearty albeit grotesque phase of
comedy. God knows, though, that the prosy tale which George Birch’s death permits me to
tell has in it aspects beside which some of our darkest tragedies are light.
Birch acquired a limitation and changed his business in 1881, yet never discussed
the case when he could avoid it. Neither did his old physician Dr. Davis, who died years ago.
It was generally stated that the affliction and shock were results of an unlucky slip whereby
Birch had locked himself for nine hours in the receiving tomb of Peck Valley Cemetery, escaping
only by crude and disastrous mechanical means; but while this much was undoubtedly true, there
were other and blacker things which the man used to whisper to me in his drunken delirium toward
the last. He confided in me because I was his doctor, and because he probably felt the need
of confiding in someone else after Davis died. He was a bachelor, wholly without relatives.
Birch, before 1881, had been the village undertaker of Peck Valley; and was
a very calloused and primitive specimen even as such specimens go. The practices I heard attributed
to him would be unbelievable today, at least in a city; and even Peck Valley would have shuddered
a bit had it known the easy ethics of its mortuary artist in such debatable matters as the ownership
of costly “laying-out” apparel invisible beneath the casket’s lid, and the
degree of dignity to be maintained in posing and adapting the unseen members of lifeless tenants
to containers not always calculated with sublimest accuracy. Most distinctly Birch was lax,
insensitive, and professionally undesirable; yet I still think he was not an evil man. He was
merely crass of fibre and function—thoughtless, careless, and liquorish, as his easily
avoidable accident proves, and without that modicum of imagination which holds the average citizen
within certain limits fixed by taste.
Just where to begin Birch’s story I can hardly decide, since I am no
practiced teller of tales. I suppose one should start in the cold December of 1880, when the
ground froze and the cemetery delvers found they could dig no more graves till spring. Fortunately
the village was small and the death rate low, so that it was possible to give all of Birch’s
inanimate charges a temporary haven in the single antiquated receiving tomb. The undertaker
grew doubly lethargic in the bitter weather, and seemed to outdo even himself in carelessness.
Never did he knock together flimsier and ungainlier caskets, or disregard more flagrantly the
needs of the rusty lock on the tomb door which he slammed open and shut with such nonchalant
abandon.
At last the spring thaw came, and graves were laboriously prepared for the
nine silent harvests of the grim reaper which waited in the tomb. Birch, though dreading the
bother of removal and interment, began his task of transference one disagreeable April morning,
but ceased before noon because of a heavy rain that seemed to irritate his horse, after having
laid but one mortal tenement to its permanent rest. That was Darius Peck, the nonagenarian,
whose grave was not far from the tomb. Birch decided that he would begin the next day with little
old Matthew Fenner, whose grave was also near by; but actually postponed the matter for three
days, not getting to work till Good Friday, the 15th. Being without superstition, he did not
heed the day at all; though ever afterward he refused to do anything of importance on that fateful
sixth day of the week. Certainly, the events of that evening greatly changed George Birch.
On the afternoon of Friday, April 15th, then, Birch set out for the tomb with
horse and wagon to transfer the body of Matthew Fenner. That he was not perfectly sober, he
subsequently admitted; though he had not then taken to the wholesale drinking by which he later
tried to forget certain things. He was just dizzy and careless enough to annoy his sensitive
horse, which as he drew it viciously up at the tomb neighed and pawed and tossed its head, much
as on that former occasion when the rain had vexed it. The day was clear, but a high wind had
sprung up; and Birch was glad to get to shelter as he unlocked the iron door and entered the
side-hill vault. Another might not have relished the damp, odorous chamber with the eight carelessly
placed coffins; but Birch in those days was insensitive, and was concerned only in getting the
right coffin for the right grave. He had not forgotten the criticism aroused when Hannah Bixby’s
relatives, wishing to transport her body to the cemetery in the city whither they had moved,
found the casket of Judge Capwell beneath her headstone.
The light was dim, but Birch’s sight was good, and he did not get Asaph
Sawyer’s coffin by mistake, although it was very similar. He had, indeed, made that coffin
for Matthew Fenner; but had cast it aside at last as too awkward and flimsy, in a fit of curious
sentimentality aroused by recalling how kindly and generous the little old man had been to him
during his bankruptcy five years before. He gave old Matt the very best his skill could produce,
but was thrifty enough to save the rejected specimen, and to use it when Asaph Sawyer died of
a malignant fever. Sawyer was not a lovable man, and many stories were told of his almost inhuman
vindictiveness and tenacious memory for wrongs real or fancied. To him Birch had felt no compunction
in assigning the carelessly made coffin which he now pushed out of the way in his quest for
the Fenner casket.
It was just as he had recognised old Matt’s coffin that the door slammed
to in the wind, leaving him in a dusk even deeper than before. The narrow transom admitted only
the feeblest of rays, and the overhead ventilation funnel virtually none at all; so that he
was reduced to a profane fumbling as he made his halting way among the long boxes toward the
latch. In this funereal twilight he rattled the rusty handles, pushed at the iron panels, and
wondered why the massive portal had grown so suddenly recalcitrant. In this twilight, too, he
began to realise the truth and to shout loudly as if his horse outside could do more than neigh
an unsympathetic reply. For the long-neglected latch was obviously broken, leaving the careless
undertaker trapped in the vault, a victim of his own oversight.
The thing must have happened at about three-thirty in the afternoon. Birch,
being by temperament phlegmatic and practical, did not shout long; but proceeded to grope about
for some tools which he recalled seeing in a corner of the tomb. It is doubtful whether he was
touched at all by the horror and exquisite weirdness of his position, but the bald fact of imprisonment
so far from the daily paths of men was enough to exasperate him thoroughly. His day’s
work was sadly interrupted, and unless chance presently brought some rambler hither, he might
have to remain all night or longer. The pile of tools soon reached, and a hammer and chisel
selected, Birch returned over the coffins to the door. The air had begun to be exceedingly unwholesome;
but to this detail he paid no attention as he toiled, half by feeling, at the heavy and corroded
metal of the latch. He would have given much for a lantern or bit of candle; but lacking these,
bungled semi-sightlessly as best he might.
When he perceived that the latch was hopelessly unyielding, at least to such
meagre tools and under such tenebrous conditions as these, Birch glanced about for other possible
points of escape. The vault had been dug from a hillside, so that the narrow ventilation funnel
in the top ran through several feet of earth, making this direction utterly useless to consider.
Over the door, however, the high, slit-like transom in the brick facade gave promise of possible
enlargement to a diligent worker; hence upon this his eyes long rested as he racked his brains
for means to reach it. There was nothing like a ladder in the tomb, and the coffin niches on
the sides and rear—which Birch seldom took the trouble to use—afforded no ascent
to the space above the door. Only the coffins themselves remained as potential stepping-stones,
and as he considered these he speculated on the best mode of arranging them. Three coffin-heights,
he reckoned, would permit him to reach the transom; but he could do better with four. The boxes
were fairly even, and could be piled up like blocks; so he began to compute how he might most
stably use the eight to rear a scalable platform four deep. As he planned, he could not but
wish that the units of his contemplated staircase had been more securely made. Whether he had
imagination enough to wish they were empty, is strongly to be doubted.
Finally he decided to lay a base of three parallel with the wall, to place
upon this two layers of two each, and upon these a single box to serve as the platform. This
arrangement could be ascended with a minimum of awkwardness, and would furnish the desired height.
Better still, though, he would utilise only two boxes of the base to support the superstructure,
leaving one free to be piled on top in case the actual feat of escape required an even greater
altitude. And so the prisoner toiled in the twilight, heaving the unresponsive remnants of mortality
with little ceremony as his miniature Tower of Babel rose course by course. Several of the coffins
began to split under the stress of handling, and he planned to save the stoutly built casket
of little Matthew Fenner for the top, in order that his feet might have as certain a surface
as possible. In the semi-gloom he trusted mostly to touch to select the right one, and indeed
came upon it almost by accident, since it tumbled into his hands as if through some odd volition
after he had unwittingly placed it beside another on the third layer.
The tower at length finished, and his aching arms rested by a pause during
which he sat on the bottom step of his grim device, Birch cautiously ascended with his tools
and stood abreast of the narrow transom. The borders of the space were entirely of brick, and
there seemed little doubt but that he could shortly chisel away enough to allow his body to
pass. As his hammer blows began to fall, the horse outside whinnied in a tone which may have
been encouraging and may have been mocking. In either case it would have been appropriate; for
the unexpected tenacity of the easy-looking brickwork was surely a sardonic commentary on the
vanity of mortal hopes, and the source of a task whose performance deserved every possible stimulus.
Dusk fell and found Birch still toiling. He worked largely by feeling now,
since newly gathered clouds hid the moon; and though progress was still slow, he felt heartened
at the extent of his encroachments on the top and bottom of the aperture. He could, he was sure,
get out by midnight—though it is characteristic of him that this thought was untinged
with eerie implications. Undisturbed by oppressive reflections on the time, the place, and the
company beneath his feet, he philosophically chipped away the stony brickwork; cursing when
a fragment hit him in the face, and laughing when one struck the increasingly excited horse
that pawed near the cypress tree. In time the hole grew so large that he ventured to try his
body in it now and then, shifting about so that the coffins beneath him rocked and creaked.
He would not, he found, have to pile another on his platform to make the proper height; for
the hole was on exactly the right level to use as soon as its size might permit.
It must have been midnight at least when Birch decided he could get through
the transom. Tired and perspiring despite many rests, he descended to the floor and sat a while
on the bottom box to gather strength for the final wriggle and leap to the ground outside. The
hungry horse was neighing repeatedly and almost uncannily, and he vaguely wished it would stop.
He was curiously unelated over his impending escape, and almost dreaded the exertion, for his
form had the indolent stoutness of early middle age. As he remounted the splitting coffins he
felt his weight very poignantly; especially when, upon reaching the topmost one, he heard that
aggravated crackle which bespeaks the wholesale rending of wood. He had, it seems, planned in
vain when choosing the stoutest coffin for the platform; for no sooner was his full bulk again
upon it than the rotting lid gave way, jouncing him two feet down on a surface which even he
did not care to imagine. Maddened by the sound, or by the stench which billowed forth even to
the open air, the waiting horse gave a scream that was too frantic for a neigh, and plunged
madly off through the night, the wagon rattling crazily behind it.
Birch, in his ghastly situation, was now too low for an easy scramble out of
the enlarged transom; but gathered his energies for a determined try. Clutching the edges of
the aperture, he sought to pull himself up, when he noticed a queer retardation in the form
of an apparent drag on both his ankles. In another moment he knew fear for the first time that
night; for struggle as he would, he could not shake clear of the unknown grasp which held his
feet in relentless captivity. Horrible pains, as of savage wounds, shot through his calves;
and in his mind was a vortex of fright mixed with an unquenchable materialism that suggested
splinters, loose nails, or some other attribute of a breaking wooden box. Perhaps he screamed.
At any rate he kicked and squirmed frantically and automatically whilst his consciousness was
almost eclipsed in a half-swoon.
Instinct guided him in his wriggle through the transom, and in the crawl which
followed his jarring thud on the damp ground. He could not walk, it appeared, and the emerging
moon must have witnessed a horrible sight as he dragged his bleeding ankles toward the cemetery
lodge; his fingers clawing the black mould in brainless haste, and his body responding with
that maddening slowness from which one suffers when chased by the phantoms of nightmare. There
was evidently, however, no pursuer; for he was alone and alive when Armington, the lodge-keeper,
answered his feeble clawing at the door.
Armington helped Birch to the outside of a spare bed and sent his little son
Edwin for Dr. Davis. The afflicted man was fully conscious, but would say nothing of any consequence;
merely muttering such things as “oh, my ankles!”, “let go!”, or “shut
in the tomb”. Then the doctor came with his medicine-case and asked crisp questions, and
removed the patient’s outer clothing, shoes, and socks. The wounds—for both ankles
were frightfully lacerated about the Achilles’ tendons—seemed to puzzle the old
physician greatly, and finally almost to frighten him. His questioning grew more than medically
tense, and his hands shook as he dressed the mangled members; binding them as if he wished to
get the wounds out of sight as quickly as possible.
For an impersonal doctor, Davis’ ominous and awestruck cross-examination
became very strange indeed as he sought to drain from the weakened undertaker every least detail
of his horrible experience. He was oddly anxious to know if Birch were sure—absolutely
sure—of the identity of that top coffin of the pile; how he had chosen it, how he had
been certain of it as the Fenner coffin in the dusk, and how he had distinguished it from the
inferior duplicate coffin of vicious Asaph Sawyer. Would the firm Fenner casket have caved in
so readily? Davis, an old-time village practitioner, had of course seen both at the respective
funerals, as indeed he had attended both Fenner and Sawyer in their last illnesses. He had even
wondered, at Sawyer’s funeral, how the vindictive farmer had managed to lie straight in
a box so closely akin to that of the diminutive Fenner.
After a full two hours Dr. Davis left, urging Birch to insist at all times
that his wounds were caused entirely by loose nails and splintering wood. What else, he added,
could ever in any case be proved or believed? But it would be well to say as little as could
be said, and to let no other doctor treat the wounds. Birch heeded this advice all the rest
of his life till he told me his story; and when I saw the scars—ancient and whitened as
they then were—I agreed that he was wise in so doing. He always remained lame, for the
great tendons had been severed; but I think the greatest lameness was in his soul. His thinking
processes, once so phlegmatic and logical, had become ineffaceably scarred; and it was pitiful
to note his response to certain chance allusions such as “Friday”, “tomb”,
“coffin”, and words of less obvious concatenation. His frightened horse had gone
home, but his frightened wits never quite did that. He changed his business, but something always
preyed upon him. It may have been just fear, and it may have been fear mixed with a queer belated
sort of remorse for bygone crudities. His drinking, of course, only aggravated what it was meant
to alleviate.
When Dr. Davis left Birch that night he had taken a lantern and gone to the
old receiving tomb. The moon was shining on the scattered brick fragments and marred facade,
and the latch of the great door yielded readily to a touch from the outside. Steeled by old
ordeals in dissecting rooms, the doctor entered and looked about, stifling the nausea of mind
and body that everything in sight and smell induced. He cried aloud once, and a little later
gave a gasp that was more terrible than a cry. Then he fled back to the lodge and broke all
the rules of his calling by rousing and shaking his patient, and hurling at him a succession
of shuddering whispers that seared into the bewildered ears like the hissing of vitriol.
“It was Asaph’s coffin, Birch, just as I thought! I knew his teeth,
with the front ones missing on the upper jaw—never, for God’s sake, shew those wounds!
The body was pretty badly gone, but if ever I saw vindictiveness on any face—or former
face. . . . You know what a fiend he was for revenge—how he ruined old
Raymond thirty years after their boundary suit, and how he stepped on the puppy that snapped
at him a year ago last August. . . . He was the devil incarnate, Birch, and I believe
his eye-for-an-eye fury could beat old Father Death himself. God, what a rage! I’d hate
to have it aimed at me!
“Why did you do it, Birch? He was a scoundrel, and I don’t blame
you for giving him a cast-aside coffin, but you always did go too damned far! Well enough to
skimp on the thing some way, but you knew what a little man old Fenner was.
“I’ll never get the picture out of my head as long as I live. You
kicked hard, for Asaph’s coffin was on the floor. His head was broken in, and everything
was tumbled about. I’ve seen sights before, but there was one thing too much here. An
eye for an eye! Great heavens, Birch, but you got what you deserved. The skull turned my stomach,
but the other was worse—those ankles cut neatly off to fit Matt Fenner’s cast-aside
coffin!”


Medusa’s Coil

I.

The drive toward Cape Girardeau had been through unfamiliar country; and as the late afternoon
light grew golden and half-dreamlike I realised that I must have directions if I expected to
reach the town before night. I did not care to be wandering about these bleak southern Missouri
lowlands after dark, for roads were poor and the November cold rather formidable in an open
roadster. Black clouds, too, were massing on the horizon; so I looked about among the long,
grey and blue shadows that streaked the flat, brownish fields, hoping to glimpse some house
where I might get the needed information.
It was a lonely and deserted country, but at last I spied a roof among a clump
of trees near the small river on my right; perhaps a full half-mile from the road, and probably
reachable by some path or drive which I would presently come upon. In the absence of any nearer
dwelling, I resolved to try my luck there; and was glad when the bushes by the roadside revealed
the ruin of a carved stone gateway, covered with dry, dead vines and choked with undergrowth
which explained why I had not been able to trace the path across the fields in my first distant
view. I saw that I could not drive the car in, so I parked it very carefully near the gate—where
a thick evergreen would shield it in case of rain—and got out for the long walk to the
house.
Traversing that brush-grown path in the gathering twilight I was conscious
of a distinct sense of foreboding, probably induced by the air of sinister decay hovering about
the gate and the former driveway. From the carvings on the old stone pillars I inferred that
this place was once an estate of manorial dignity; and I could clearly see that the driveway
had originally boasted guardian lines of linden trees, some of which had died, while others
had lost their special identity among the wild scrub growths of the region.
As I ploughed onward, cockleburrs and stickers clung to my clothes, and I began
to wonder whether the place could be inhabited after all. Was I tramping on a vain errand? For
a moment I was tempted to go back and try some farm farther along the road, when a view of the
house ahead aroused my curiosity and stimulated my venturesome spirit.
There was something provocatively fascinating in the tree-girt, decrepit pile
before me, for it spoke of the graces and spaciousness of a bygone era and a far more southerly
environment. It was a typical wooden plantation house of the classic, early nineteenth-century
pattern, with two and a half stories and a great Ionic portico whose pillars reached up as far
as the attic and supported a triangular pediment. Its state of decay was extreme and obvious;
one of the vast columns having rotted and fallen to the ground, while the upper piazza or balcony
had sagged dangerously low. Other buildings, I judged, had formerly stood near it.
As I mounted the broad stone steps to the low porch and the carved and fanlighted
doorway I felt distinctly nervous, and started to light a cigarette—desisting when I saw
how dry and inflammable everything about me was. Though now convinced that the house was deserted,
I nevertheless hesitated to violate its dignity without knocking; so tugged at the rusty iron
knocker until I could get it to move, and finally set up a cautious rapping which seemed to
make the whole place shake and rattle. There was no response, yet once more I plied the cumbrous,
creaking device—as much to dispel the sense of unholy silence and solitude as to arouse
any possible occupant of the ruin.
Somewhere near the river I heard the mournful note of a dove, and it seemed
as if the coursing water itself were faintly audible. Half in a dream, I seized and rattled
the ancient latch, and finally gave the great six-panelled door a frank trying. It was unlocked,
as I could see in a moment; and though it stuck and grated on its hinges I began to push it
open, stepping through it into a vast shadowy hall as I did so.
But the moment I took this step I regretted it. It was not that a legion of
spectres confronted me in that dim and dusty hall with the ghostly Empire furniture; but that
I knew all at once that the place was not deserted at all. There was a creaking on the great
curved staircase, and the sound of faltering footsteps slowly descending. Then I saw a tall,
bent figure silhouetted for an instant against the great Palladian window on the landing.
My first start of terror was soon over, and as the figure descended the final
flight I was ready to greet the householder whose privacy I had invaded. In the semi-darkness
I could see him reach in his pocket for a match. There came a flare as he lighted a small kerosene
lamp which stood on a rickety console table near the foot of the stairs. In the feeble glow
was revealed the stooping figure of a very tall, emaciated old man; disordered as to dress and
unshaved as to face, yet for all that with the bearing and expression of a gentleman.
I did not wait for him to speak, but at once began to explain my presence.
“You’ll pardon my coming in like this, but when my knocking didn’t
raise anybody I concluded that no one lived here. What I wanted originally was to know the right
road to Cape Girardeau—the shortest road, that is. I wanted to get there before dark, but
now, of course—“
As I paused, the man spoke; in exactly the cultivated tone I had expected,
and with a mellow accent as unmistakably Southern as the house he inhabited.
“Rather, you must pardon me for not answering your knock more promptly.
I live in a very retired way, and am not usually expecting visitors. At first I thought you
were a mere curiosity-seeker. Then when you knocked again I started to answer, but I am not
well and have to move very slowly. Spinal neuritis—very troublesome case.
“But as for your getting to town before dark—it’s plain you
can’t do that. The road you are on—for I suppose you came from the gate—isn’t
the best or shortest way. What you must do is to take your first left after you leave the gate—that
is, the first real road to your left. There are three or four cart paths you can ignore, but
you can’t mistake the real road because of the extra large willow tree on the right just
opposite it. Then when you’ve turned, keep on past two roads and turn to the right along
the third. After that—“
Perplexed by these elaborate directions—confusing things indeed to a total
stranger—I could not help interrupting.
“Please wait a moment! How can I follow all these clues in pitch darkness,
without ever having been near here before, and with only an indifferent pair of headlights to
tell me what is and what isn’t a road? Besides, I think it’s going to storm pretty
soon, and my car is an open one. It looks as if I were in a bad fix if I want to get to Cape
Girardeau tonight. The fact is, I don’t think I’d better try to make it. I don’t
like to impose burdens, or anything like that—but in view of the circumstances, do you
suppose you could put me up for the night? I won’t be any trouble—no meals or anything.
Just let me have a corner to sleep in till daylight, and I’m all right. I can leave the
car in the road where it is—a bit of wet weather won’t hurt it if worst comes to worst.”
As I made my sudden request I could see the old man’s face lose its former
expression of quiet resignation and take on an odd, surprised look.
“Sleep—here?”
He seemed so astonished at my request that I repeated it.
“Yes, why not? I assure you I won’t be any trouble. What else 
can I do? I’m a stranger hereabouts, these roads are a labyrinth in the dark, and I’ll
wager it’ll be raining torrents outside of an hour—“
This time it was my host’s turn to interrupt, and as he did so I could
feel a peculiar quality in his deep, musical voice.
“A stranger—of course you must be, else you wouldn’t think of
sleeping here; wouldn’t think of coming here at all. People don’t come here nowadays.”
He paused, and my desire to stay was increased a thousandfold by the sense
of mystery his laconic words seemed to evoke. There was surely something alluringly queer about
this place, and the pervasive musty smell seemed to cloak a thousand secrets. Again I noticed
the extreme decrepitude of everything about me; manifest even in the feeble rays of the single
small lamp. I felt woefully chilly, and saw with regret that no heating seemed to be provided;
yet so great was my curiosity that I still wished most ardently to stay and learn something
of the recluse and his dismal abode.
“Let that be as it may,” I replied. “I can’t help about
other people. But I surely would like to have a spot to stop till daylight. Still—if people
don’t relish this place, mayn’t it be because it’s getting so run-down? Of course
I suppose it would take a fortune to keep such an estate up, but if the burden’s too great
why don’t you look for smaller quarters? Why try to stick it out here in this way—with
all the hardships and discomforts?”
The man did not seem offended, but answered me very gravely.
“Surely you may stay if you really wish to—you can come to
no harm that I know of. But others claim there are certain peculiarly undesirable influences
here. As for me—I stay here because I have to. There is something I feel it a duty to guard—something
that holds me. I wish I had the money and health and ambition to take decent care of the house
and grounds.”
With my curiosity still more heightened, I prepared to take my host at his
word; and followed him slowly upstairs when he motioned me to do so. It was very dark now, and
a faint pattering outside told me that the threatened rain had come. I would have been glad
of any shelter, but this was doubly welcome because of the hints of mystery about the place
and its master. For an incurable lover of the grotesque, no more fitting haven could have been
provided.
II.
There was a second-floor corner room in less unkempt shape than the rest of
the house, and into this my host led me; setting down his small lamp and lighting a somewhat
larger one. From the cleanliness and contents of the room, and from the books ranged along the
walls, I could see that I had not guessed amiss in thinking the man a gentleman of taste and
breeding. He was a hermit and eccentric, no doubt, but he still had standards and intellectual
interests. As he waved me to a seat I began a conversation on general topics, and was pleased
to find him not at all taciturn. If anything, he seemed glad of someone to talk to, and did
not even attempt to swerve the discourse from personal topics.
He was, I learned, one Antoine de Russy, of an ancient, powerful, and cultivated
line of Louisiana planters. More than a century ago his grandfather, a younger son, had migrated
to southern Missouri and founded a new estate in the lavish ancestral manner; building this
pillared mansion and surrounding it with all the accessories of a great plantation. There had
been, at one time, as many as 200 negroes in the cabins which stood on the flat ground in the
rear—ground that the river had now invaded—and to hear them singing and laughing and
playing the banjo at night was to know the fullest charm of a civilisation and social order
now sadly extinct. In front of the house, where the great guardian oaks and willows stood, there
had been a lawn like a broad green carpet, always watered and trimmed and with flagstoned, flower-bordered
walks curving through it. “Riverside”—for such the place was called—had
been a lovely and idyllic homestead in its day; and my host could recall it when many traces
of its best period still lingered.
It was raining hard now, with dense sheets of water beating against the insecure
roof, walls, and windows, and sending in drops through a thousand chinks and crevices. Moisture
trickled down to the floor from unsuspected places, and the mounting wind rattled the rotting,
loose-hinged shutters outside. But I minded none of this, nor even thought of my roadster outside
beneath the trees, for I saw that a story was coming. Incited to reminiscence, my host made
a move to shew me to sleeping-quarters; but kept on recalling the older, better days. Soon,
I saw, I would receive an inkling of why he lived alone in that ancient place, and why his neighbours
thought it full of undesirable influences. His voice was very musical as he spoke on, and his
tale soon took a turn which left me no chance to grow drowsy.
“Yes—Riverside was built in 1816, and my father was born here in
1828. He’d be over a century old now if he were alive, but he died young—so young
I can just barely remember him. In ’64 that was—he was killed in the war, Seventh
Louisiana Infantry C.S.A., for he went back to the old home to enlist. My grandfather was too
old to fight, yet he lived on to be ninety-five, and helped my mother bring me up. A good bringing-up,
too—I’ll give them credit. We always had strong traditions—high notions of honour—and
my grandfather saw to it that I grew up the way de Russys have grown up, generation after generation,
ever since the Crusades. We weren’t quite wiped out financially, but managed to get on
very comfortably after the war. I went to a good school in Louisiana, and later to Princeton.
Later on I was able to get the plantation on a fairly profitable basis—though you see what
it’s come to now.
“My mother died when I was twenty, and my grandfather two years later.
It was rather lonely after that; and in ’85 I married a distant cousin in New Orleans.
Things might have been different if she’d lived, but she died when my son Denis was born.
Then I had only Denis. I didn’t try marriage again, but gave all my time to the boy. He
was like me—like all the de Russys—darkish and tall and thin, and with the devil of
a temper. I gave him the same training my grandfather had given me, but he didn’t need
much training when it came to points of honour. It was in him, I reckon. Never saw such high
spirit—all I could do to keep him from running away to the Spanish War when he was eleven!
Romantic young devil, too—full of high notions—you’d call ’em Victorian,
now—no trouble at all to make him let the nigger wenches alone. I sent him to the same
school I’d gone to, and to Princeton, too. He was Class of 1909.
“In the end he decided to be a doctor, and went a year to the Harvard
Medical School. Then he hit on the idea of keeping to the old French tradition of the family,
and argued me into sending him across to the Sorbonne. I did—and proudly enough, though
I knew how lonely I’d be with him so far off. Would to God I hadn’t! I thought he
was the safest kind of a boy to be in Paris. He had a room in the Rue St. Jacques—that’s
near the University in the ‘Latin Quarter’—but according to his letters and his
friends he didn’t cut up with the gayer dogs at all. The people he knew were mostly young
fellows from home—serious students and artists who thought more of their work than of striking
attitudes and painting the town red.
“But of course there were lots of fellows who were on a sort of dividing
line between serious studies and the devil. The aesthetes—the decadents, you know. Experimenters
in life and sensation—the Baudelaire kind of a chap. Naturally Denis ran up against a good
many of these, and saw a good deal of their life. They had all sorts of crazy circles and cults—imitation
devil-worship, fake Black Masses, and the like. Doubt if it did them much harm on the whole—probably
most of ’em forgot all about it in a year or two. One of the deepest in this queer stuff
was a fellow Denis had known at school—for that matter, whose father I’d known myself.
Frank Marsh, of New Orleans. Disciple of Lafcadio Hearn and Gauguin and Van Gogh—regular
epitome of the yellow ’nineties. Poor devil—he had the makings of a great artist,
at that.
“Marsh was the oldest friend Denis had in Paris, so as a matter of course
they saw a good deal of each other—to talk over old times at St. Clair Academy, and all
that. The boy wrote me a good deal about him, and I didn’t see any especial harm when he
spoke of the group of mystics Marsh ran with. It seems there was some cult of prehistoric Egyptian
and Carthaginian magic having a rage among the Bohemian element on the left bank—some nonsensical
thing that pretended to reach back to forgotten sources of hidden truth in lost African civilisations—the
great Zimbabwe, the dead Atlantean cities in the Hoggar region of the Sahara—and that had
a lot of gibberish connected with snakes and human hair. At least, I called it gibberish, then.
Denis used to quote Marsh as saying odd things about the veiled facts behind the legend of Medusa’s
snaky locks—and behind the later Ptolemaic myth of Berenice, who offered up her hair to
save her husband-brother, and had it set in the sky as the constellation Coma Berenices.
“I don’t think this business made much impression on Denis until
the night of the queer ritual at Marsh’s rooms when he met the priestess. Most of the devotees
of this cult were young fellows, but the head of it was a young woman who called herself ‘Tanit-Isis’—letting
it be known that her real name—her name in this latest incarnation, as she put it—was
Marceline Bedard. She claimed to be the left-handed daughter of Marquis de Chameaux, and seemed
to have been both a petty artist and an artist’s model before adopting this more lucrative
magical game. Someone said she had lived for a time in the West Indies—Martinique, I think—but
she was very reticent about herself. Part of her pose was a great show of austerity and holiness,
but I don’t think the more experienced students took that very seriously.
“Denis, though, was far from experienced, and wrote me fully ten pages
of slush about the goddess he had discovered. If I’d only realised his simplicity I might
have done something, but I never thought a puppy infatuation like that could mean much. I felt
absurdly sure that Denis’ touchy personal honour and family pride would always keep him
out of the most serious complications.
“As time went on, though, his letters began to make me nervous. He mentioned
this Marceline more and more, and his friends less and less; and began talking about the ‘cruel
and silly way’ they declined to introduce her to their mothers and sisters. He seems to
have asked her no questions about herself, and I don’t doubt but that she filled him full
of romantic legendry concerning her origin and divine revelations and the way people slighted
her. At length I could see that Denis was altogether cutting his own crowd and spending the
bulk of his time with this alluring priestess. At her especial request he never told the old
crowd of their continual meetings; so nobody over there tried to break the affair up.
“I suppose she thought he was fabulously rich; for he had the air of a
patrician, and people of a certain class think all aristocratic Americans are wealthy. In any
case, she probably thought this a rare chance to contract a genuine right-handed alliance with
a really eligible young man. By the time my nervousness burst into open advice, it was too late.
The boy had lawfully married her, and wrote that he was dropping his studies and bringing the
woman home to Riverside. He said she had made a great sacrifice and resigned her leadership
of the magical cult, and that henceforward she would be merely a private gentlewoman—the
future mistress of Riverside, and mother of de Russys to come.
“Well, sir, I took it the best way I could. I knew that sophisticated
Continentals have different standards from our old American ones—and anyway, I really knew
nothing against the woman. A charlatan, perhaps, but why necessarily any worse? I suppose I
tried to keep as naive as possible about such things in those days, for the boy’s sake.
Clearly, there was nothing for a man of sense to do but to let Denis alone so long as his new
wife conformed to de Russy ways. Let her have a chance to prove herself—perhaps she wouldn’t
hurt the family as much as some might fear. So I didn’t raise any objections or ask any
penitence. The thing was done, and I stood ready to welcome the boy back, whatever he brought
with him.
“They got here three weeks after the telegram telling of the marriage.
Marceline was beautiful—there was no denying that—and I could see how the boy might
very well get foolish about her. She did have an air of breeding, and I think to this day she
must have had some strains of good blood in her. She was apparently not much over twenty; of
medium size, fairly slim, and as graceful as a tigress in posture and motions. Her complexion
was a deep olive—like old ivory—and her eyes were large and very dark. She had small,
classically regular features—though not quite clean-cut enough to suit my taste—and
the most singular head of jet black hair that I ever saw.
“I didn’t wonder that she had dragged the subject of hair into her
magical cult, for with that heavy profusion of it the idea must have occurred to her naturally.
Coiled up, it made her look like some Oriental princess in a drawing of Aubrey Beardsley’s.
Hanging down her back, it came well below her knees and shone in the light as if it had possessed
some separate, unholy vitality of its own. I would almost have thought of Medusa or Berenice
myself—without having such things suggested to me—upon seeing and studying that hair.
“Sometimes I thought it moved slightly of itself, and tended to arrange
itself in distinct ropes or strands, but this may have been sheer illusion. She brushed it incessantly,
and seemed to use some sort of preparation on it. I got the notion once—a curious, whimsical
notion—that it was a living thing which she had to feed in some strange way. All nonsense—but
it added to my feeling of constraint about her and her hair.
“For I can’t deny that I failed to like her wholly, no matter how
hard I tried. I couldn’t tell what the trouble was, but it was there. Something about her
repelled me very subtly, and I could not help weaving morbid and macabre associations about
everything connected with her. Her complexion called up thoughts of Babylon, Atlantis, Lemuria,
and the terrible forgotten dominations of an elder world; her eyes struck me sometimes as the
eyes of some unholy forest creature or animal-goddess too immeasurably ancient to be fully human;
and her hair—that dense, exotic, overnourished growth of oily inkiness—made one shiver
as a great black python might have done. There was no doubt but that she realised my involuntary
attitude—though I tried to hide it, and she tried to hide the fact that she noticed it.
“Yet the boy’s infatuation lasted. He positively fawned on her, and
overdid all the little gallantries of daily life to a sickening degree. She appeared to return
the feeling, though I could see it took a conscious effort to make her duplicate his enthusiasms
and extravagances. For one thing, I think she was piqued to learn that we weren’t as wealthy
as she had expected.
“It was a bad business all told. I could see that sad undercurrents were
arising. Denis was half-hypnotised with puppy-love, and began to grow away from me as he felt
my shrinking from his wife. This kind of thing went on for months, and I saw that I was losing
my only son—the boy who had formed the centre of all my thoughts and acts for the past
quarter century. I’ll own that I felt bitter about it—what father wouldn’t? And
yet I could do nothing.
“Marceline seemed to be a good wife enough in those early months, and
our friends received her without any quibbling or questioning. I was always nervous, though,
about what some of the young fellows in Paris might write home to their relatives after the
news of the marriage spread around. Despite the woman’s love of secrecy, it couldn’t
remain hidden forever—indeed, Denis had written a few of his closest friends, in strict
confidence, as soon as he was settled with her at Riverside.
“I got to staying alone in my room more and more, with my failing health
as an excuse. It was about that time that my present spinal neuritis began to develop—which
made the excuse a pretty good one. Denis didn’t seem to notice the trouble, or take any
interest in me and my habits and affairs; and it hurt me to see how callous he was getting.
I began to get sleepless, and often racked my brain in the night to try to find out what really
was the matter—what it really was that made my new daughter-in-law so repulsive and even
dimly horrible to me. It surely wasn’t her old mystical nonsense, for she had left all
the past behind her and never mentioned it once. She didn’t even do any painting, although
I understood that she had once dabbled in art.
“Oddly, the only ones who seemed to share my uneasiness were the servants.
The darkies around the house seemed very sullen in their attitude toward her, and in a few weeks
all save the few who were strongly attached to our family had left. These few—old Scipio
and his wife Sarah, the cook Delilah, and Mary, Scipio’s daughter—were as civil as
possible; but plainly revealed that their new mistress commanded their duty rather than their
affection. They stayed in their own remote part of the house as much as possible. McCabe, our
white chauffeur, was insolently admiring rather than hostile; and another exception was a very
old Zulu woman said to have come from Africa over a hundred years before, who had been a sort
of leader in her small cabin as a kind of family pensioner. Old Sophonisba always shewed reverence
whenever Marceline came near her, and one time I saw her kiss the ground where her mistress
had walked. Blacks are superstitious animals, and I wondered whether Marceline had been talking
any of her mystical nonsense to our hands in order to overcome their evident dislike.”
III.
“Well, that’s how we went on for nearly half a year. Then, in the
summer of 1916, things began to happen. Toward the middle of June Denis got a note from his
old friend Frank Marsh, telling of a sort of nervous breakdown which made him want to take a
rest in the country. It was postmarked New Orleans—for Marsh had gone home from Paris when
he felt the collapse coming on—and seemed a very plain though polite bid for an invitation
from us. Marsh, of course, knew that Marceline was here; and asked very courteously after her.
Denis was sorry to hear of his trouble and told him at once to come along for an indefinite
visit.
“Marsh came—and I was shocked to notice how he had changed since
I had seen him in his earlier days. He was a smallish, lightish fellow, with blue eyes and an
undecided chin; and now I could see the effects of drink and I don’t know what else in
his puffy eyelids, enlarged nose-pores, and heavy lines around the mouth. I reckon he had taken
his pose of decadence pretty seriously, and set out to be as much of a Rimbaud, Baudelaire,
or Lautréamont as he could. And yet he was delightful to talk to—for like all decadents
he was exquisitely sensitive to the colour and atmosphere and names of things; admirably, thoroughly
alive, and with whole records of conscious experience in obscure, shadowy fields of living and
feeling which most of us pass over without knowing they exist. Poor young devil—if only
his father had lived longer and taken him in hand! There was great stuff in the boy!
“I was glad of the visit, for I felt it would help to set up a normal
atmosphere in the house again. And that’s what it really seemed to do at first; for as
I said, Marsh was a delight to have around. He was as sincere and profound an artist as I ever
saw in my life, and I certainly believe that nothing on earth mattered to him except the perception
and expression of beauty. When he saw an exquisite thing, or was creating one, his eyes would
dilate until the light irises went nearly out of sight—leaving two mystical black pits
in that weak, delicate, chalk-like face; black pits opening on strange worlds which none of
us could guess about.
“When he reached here, though, he didn’t have many chances to shew
this tendency; for he had, as he told Denis, gone quite stale. It seems he had been very successful
as an artist of a bizarre kind—like Fuseli or Goya or Sime or Clark Ashton Smith—but
had suddenly become played out. The world of ordinary things around him had ceased to hold anything
he could recognise as beauty—beauty, that is, of enough force and poignancy to arouse his
creative faculty. He had often been this way before—all decadents are—but this time
he could not invent any new, strange, or outré sensation or experience which would supply
the needed illusion of fresh beauty or stimulatingly adventurous expectancy. He was like a Durtal
or a des Esseintes at the most jaded point of his curious orbit.
“Marceline was away when Marsh arrived. She hadn’t been enthusiastic
about his coming, and had refused to decline an invitation from some of our friends in St. Louis
which came about that time for her and Denis. Denis, of course, stayed to receive his guest;
but Marceline had gone on alone. It was the first time they had ever been separated, and I hoped
the interval would help to dispel the sort of daze that was making such a fool of the boy. Marceline
shewed no hurry to get back, but seemed to me to prolong her absence as much as she could. Denis
stood it better than one would have expected from such a doting husband, and seemed more like
his old self as he talked over other days with Marsh and tried to cheer the listless aesthete
up.
“It was Marsh who seemed most impatient to see the woman; perhaps because
he thought her strange beauty, or some phase of the mysticism which had gone into her one-time
magical cult, might help to reawaken his interest in things and give him another start toward
artistic creation. That there was no baser reason, I was absolutely certain from what I knew
of Marsh’s character. With all his weaknesses, he was a gentleman—and it had indeed
relieved me when I first learned that he wanted to come here because his willingness to accept
Denis’ hospitality proved that there was no reason why he shouldn’t.
“When, at last, Marceline did return, I could see that Marsh was tremendously
affected. He did not attempt to make her talk of the bizarre thing which she had so definitely
abandoned, but was unable to hide a powerful admiration which kept his eyes—now dilated
in that curious way for the first time during his visit—riveted to her every moment she
was in the room. She, however, seemed uneasy rather than pleased by his steady scrutiny—that
is, she seemed so at first, though this feeling of hers wore away in a few days, and left the
two on a basis of the most cordial and voluble congeniality. I could see Marsh studying her
constantly when he thought no one was watching; and I wondered how long it would be that only
the artist, and not the primitive man, would be aroused by her mysterious graces.
“Denis naturally felt some irritation at this turn of affairs; though
he realised that his guest was a man of honour and that, as kindred mystics and aesthetes, Marceline
and Marsh would naturally have things and interests to discuss in which a more or less conventional
person could have no part. He didn’t hold anything against anybody, but merely regretted
that his own imagination was too limited and traditional to let him talk with Marceline as Marsh
talked. At this stage of things I began to see more of the boy. With his wife otherwise busy,
he had time to remember that he had a father—and a father who was ready to help him in
any sort of perplexity or difficulty.
“We often sat together on the veranda watching Marsh and Marceline as
they rode up or down the drive on horseback, or played tennis on the court that used to stretch
south of the house. They talked mostly in French, which Marsh, though he hadn’t more than
a quarter-portion of French blood, handled more glibly than either Denis or I could speak it.
Marceline’s English, always academically correct, was rapidly improving in accent; but
it was plain that she relished dropping back into her mother-tongue. As we looked at the congenial
couple they made, I could see the boy’s cheek and throat muscles tighten—though he
wasn’t a whit less ideal a host to Marsh, or a whit less considerate a husband to Marceline.
“All this was generally in the afternoon; for Marceline rose very late,
had breakfast in bed, and took an immense amount of time preparing to come downstairs. I never
knew of anyone so wrapped up in cosmetics, beauty exercises, hair-oils, unguents, and everything
of that kind. It was in these morning hours that Denis and Marsh did their real visiting, and
exchanged the close confidences which kept their friendship up despite the strain that jealousy
imposed.
“Well, it was in one of those morning talks on the veranda that Marsh
made the proposition which brought on the end. I was laid up with some of my neuritis, but had
managed to get downstairs and stretch out on the front parlour sofa near the long window. Denis
and Marsh were just outside; so I couldn’t help hearing all they said. They had been talking
about art, and the curious, capricious environmental elements needed to jolt an artist into
producing the real article, when Marsh suddenly swerved from abstractions to the personal application
he must have had in mind from the start.
“‘I suppose,’ he was saying, ‘that nobody can tell just
what it is in some scenes or objects that makes them aesthetic stimuli for certain individuals.
Basically, of course, it must have some reference to each man’s background of stored-up
mental associations, for no two people have the same scale of sensitiveness and responses. We
decadents are artists for whom all ordinary things have ceased to have any emotional or imaginative
significance, but no one of us responds in the same way to exactly the same extraordinary thing.
Now take me, for instance. . . .’
“He paused and resumed.
“‘I know, Denny, that I can say these things to you because you have
such a preternaturally unspoiled mind—clean, fine, direct, objective, and all that. You
won’t misunderstand as an oversubtilised, effete man of the world might.’
“He paused once more.
“‘The fact is, I think I know what’s needed to set my imagination
working again. I’ve had a dim idea of it ever since we were in Paris, but I’m sure
now. It’s Marceline, old chap—that face and that hair, and the train of shadowy images
they bring up. Not merely visible beauty—though God knows there’s enough of that—but
something peculiar and individualised, that can’t exactly be explained. Do you know, in
the last few days I’ve felt the existence of such a stimulus so keenly that I honestly
think I could outdo myself—break into the real masterpiece class if I could get hold of
paint and canvas at just the time when her face and hair set my fancy stirring and weaving.
There’s something weird and other-worldly about it—something joined up with the dim
ancient thing Marceline represents. I don’t know how much she’s told you about that
side of her, but I can assure you there’s plenty of it. She has some marvellous links with
the outside. . . .”
“Some change in Denis’ expression must have halted the speaker here,
for there was a considerable spell of silence before the words went on. I was utterly taken
aback, for I’d expected no such overt development like this; and I wondered what my son could
be thinking. My heart began to pound violently, and I strained my ears in the frankest of intentional
eavesdropping. Then Marsh resumed.
“‘Of course you’re jealous—I know how a speech like mine
must sound—but I can swear to you that you needn’t be.’
“Denis did not answer, and Marsh went on.
“‘To tell the truth, I could never be in love with Marceline—I
couldn’t even be a cordial friend of hers in the warmest sense. Why, damn it all, I felt
like a hypocrite talking with her these days as I’ve been doing.
“‘The case simply is, that one phase of her half hypnotises me in
a certain way—a very strange, fantastic, and dimly terrible way—just as another phase
half hypnotises you in a much more normal way. I see something in her—or to be psychologically
exact, something through her or beyond her—that you don’t see at all. Something that
brings up a vast pageantry of shapes from forgotten abysses, and makes me want to paint incredible
things whose outlines vanish the instant I try to envisage them clearly. Don’t mistake,
Denny, your wife is a magnificent being, a splendid focus of cosmic forces who has a right
to be called divine if anything on earth has!’
“I felt a clearing of the situation at this point, for the abstract strangeness
of Marsh’s expressed statement, plus the flattery he was now heaping on Marceline, could
not fail to disarm and mollify one as fondly proud of his consort as Denis always was. Marsh
evidently caught the change himself, for there was more confidence in his tone as he continued.
“‘I must paint her, Denny—must paint that hair—and you won’t
regret it. There’s something more than mortal about that hair—something more than
beautiful—’
“He paused, and I wondered what Denis could be thinking. I wondered, indeed,
what I was really thinking myself. Was Marsh’s interest actually that of the artist alone,
or was he merely infatuated as Denis had been? I had thought, in their schooldays, that he had
envied my boy; and I dimly felt that it might be the same now. On the other hand, something
in that talk of artistic stimulus had rung amazingly true; so that the more I pondered, the
more I was inclined to take the stuff at face value. Denis seemed to do so, too, for although
I could not catch his low-spoken reply, I could tell by the effect it produced that it must
have been affirmative.
“There was a sound of someone slapping another on the back, and then a
grateful speech from Marsh that I was long to remember.
“‘That’s great, Denny; and just as I told you, you’ll never
regret it. In a sense, I’m half doing it for you. You’ll be a different man when you
see it. I’ll put you back where you used to be—give you a waking-up and a sort of
salvation—but you can’t see what I mean as yet. Just remember old friendship, and
don’t get the idea that I’m not the same old bird!’
“I rose perplexedly as I saw the two stroll off across the lawn, arm in
arm, and smoking in unison. What could Marsh have meant by his strange and almost ominous reassurance?
The more my fears were quieted in one direction, the more they were aroused in another. Look
at it in any way I could, it seemed to be rather a bad business.
“But matters got started just the same. Denis fixed up an attic room with
skylights, and Marsh sent for all sorts of painting equipment. Everyone was rather excited about
the new venture, and I was at least glad that something was on foot to break the brooding tension.
Soon the sittings began, and we all took them quite seriously—for we could see that Marsh
regarded them as important artistic events. Denny and I used to go quietly about the house as
though something sacred were occurring, and we knew that it was sacred so far as Marsh was concerned.
“With Marceline, though, it was a different matter, as I began to see
at once. Whatever Marsh’s reactions to the sittings may have been, hers were painfully
obvious. Every possible way she betrayed a frank and commonplace infatuation for the artist,
and would repulse Denis’ marks of affection whenever she dared. Oddly, I noticed this more
vividly than Denis himself, and tried to devise some plan for keeping the boy’s mind easy
until the matter could be straightened out. There was no use in having him excited about it
if it could be helped.
“In the end I decided that Denis had better be away while the disagreeable
situation existed. I could represent his interests well enough at this end, and sooner or later
Marsh would finish the picture and go. My view of Marsh’s honour was such that I did not
look for any worse developments. When the matter had blown over, and Marceline had forgotten
about her new infatuation, it would be time enough to have Denis on hand again.
“So I wrote a long letter to my marketing and financial agent in New York,
and cooked up a plan to have the boy summoned there for an indefinite time. I had the agent
write him that our affairs absolutely required one of us to go East, and of course my illness
made it clear that I could not be the one. It was arranged that when Denis got to New York he
would find enough plausible matters to keep him busy as long as I thought he ought to be away.
“The plan worked perfectly, and Denis started for New York without the
least suspicion; Marceline and Marsh going with him in the car to Cape Girardeau, where he caught
the afternoon train to St. Louis. They returned about dark, and as McCabe drove the car back
to the stables I could hear them talking on the veranda—in those same chairs near the long
parlour window where Marsh and Denis had sat when I overheard them talk about the portrait.
This time I resolved to do some intentional eavesdropping, so quietly went down to the front
parlour and stretched out on the sofa near the window.
“At first I could not hear anything, but very shortly there came a sound
as of a chair being shifted, followed by a short, sharp breath and a sort of inarticulately
hurt exclamation from Marceline. Then I heard Marsh speaking in a strained, almost formal voice.
“‘I’d enjoy working tonight if you’re not too tired.’
“Marceline’s reply was in the same hurt tone which had marked her
exclamation. She used English as he had done.
“‘Oh, Frank, is that really all you care about? Forever working!
Can’t we just sit out in this glorious moonlight?’
“He answered impatiently, his voice shewing a certain contempt beneath
the dominant quality of artistic enthusiasm.
“‘Moonlight! Good God, what cheap sentimentality! For a supposedly
sophisticated person you surely do hang on to some of the crudest claptrap that ever escaped
from the dime novels! With art at your elbow, you have to think of the moon—cheap as a
spotlight at the varieties! Or perhaps it makes you think of the Roodmas dance around the stone
pillars at Auteuil. Hell, how you used to make those goggle-eyed yaps stare! But no—I suppose
you’ve dropped all that now. No more Atlantean magic or hair-snake rites for Madame de
Russy! I’m the only one to remember the old things—the things that came down through
the temples of Tanit and echoed on the ramparts of Zimbabwe. But I won’t be cheated of
that remembrance—all that is weaving itself into the thing on my canvas—the thing
that is going to capture wonder and crystallise the secrets of 75,000 years. . . .’
“Marceline interrupted in a voice full of mixed emotions.
“‘It’s you who are cheaply sentimental now! You know well that
the old things had better be let alone. All of you had better look out if ever I chant the old
rites or try to call up what lies hidden in Yuggoth, Zimbabwe, and R’lyeh. I thought you
had more sense!
“‘You lack logic. You want me to be interested in this precious painting
of yours, yet you never let me see what you’re doing. Always that black cloth over it!
It’s of me—I shouldn’t think it would matter if I saw it. . . .’
“Marsh was interrupting this time, his voice curiously hard and strained.
“‘No. Not now. You’ll see it in due course of time. You say
it’s of you—yes, it’s that, but it’s more. If you knew, you mightn’t
be so impatient. Poor Denis! My God, it’s a shame!’
“My throat went suddenly dry as the words rose to an almost febrile pitch.
What could Marsh mean? Suddenly I saw that he had stopped and was entering the house alone.
I heard the front door slam, and listened as his footsteps ascended the stairs. Outside on the
veranda I could still hear Marceline’s heavy, angry breathing. I crept away sick at heart,
feeling that there were grave things to ferret out before I could safely let Denis come back.
“After that evening the tension around the place was even worse than before.
Marceline had always lived on flattery and fawning, and the shock of those few blunt words from
Marsh was too much for her temperament. There was no living in the house with her any more,
for with poor Denis gone she took out her abusiveness on everybody. When she could find no one
indoors to quarrel with she would go out to Sophonisba’s cabin and spend hours talking
with the queer old Zulu woman. Aunt Sophy was the only person who would fawn abjectly enough
to suit her, and when I tried once to overhear their conversation I found Marceline whispering
about ‘elder secrets’ and ‘unknown Kadath’ while the negress rocked to and
fro in her chair, making inarticulate sounds of reverence and admiration every now and then.
“But nothing could break her dog-like infatuation for Marsh. She would
talk bitterly and sullenly to him, yet was getting more and more obedient to his wishes. It
was very convenient for him, since he now became able to make her pose for the picture whenever
he felt like painting. He tried to shew gratitude for this willingness, but I thought I could
detect a kind of contempt or even loathing beneath his careful politeness. For my part, I frankly
hated Marceline! There was no use in calling my attitude anything as mild as mere dislike these
days. Certainly, I was glad Denis was away. His letters, not nearly so frequent as I wished,
shewed signs of strain and worry.
“As the middle of August went by I gathered from Marsh’s remarks
that the portrait was nearly done. His mood seemed increasingly sardonic, though Marceline’s
temper improved a bit as the prospect of seeing the thing tickled her vanity. I can still recall
the day when Marsh said he’d have everything finished within a week. Marceline brightened
up perceptibly, though not without a venomous look at me. It seemed as if her coiled hair visibly
tightened about her head.
“‘I’m to be the first to see it!’ she snapped. Then, smiling
at Marsh, she said, ‘And if I don’t like it I shall slash it to pieces!’
“Marsh’s face took on the most curious look I have ever seen it wear
as he answered her.
“‘I can’t vouch for your taste, Marceline, but I swear it will
be magnificent! Not that I want to take much credit—art creates itself—and this thing
had to be done. Just wait!’
“During the next few days I felt a queer sense of foreboding, as if the
completion of the picture meant a kind of catastrophe instead of a relief. Denis, too, had not
written me, and my agent in New York said he was planning some trip to the country. I wondered
what the outcome of the whole thing would be. What a queer mixture of elements—Marsh and
Marceline, Denis and I! How would all these ultimately react on one another? When my fears grew
too great I tried to lay them all to my infirmity, but that explanation never quite satisfied
me.”
IV.
“Well, the thing exploded on Tuesday, the twenty-sixth of August. I had
risen at my usual time and had breakfast, but was not good for much because of the pain in my
spine. It had been troubling me badly of late, and forcing me to take opiates when it got too
unbearable; nobody else was downstairs except the servants, though I could hear Marceline moving
about in her room. Marsh slept in the attic next his studio, and had begun to keep such late
hours that he was seldom up till noon. About ten o’clock the pain got the better of me,
so that I took a double dose of my opiate and lay down on the parlour sofa. The last I heard
was Marceline’s pacing overhead. Poor creature—if I had known! She must have been
walking before the long mirror admiring herself. That was like her. Vain from start to finish—revelling
in her own beauty, just as she revelled in all the little luxuries Denis was able to give her.
“I didn’t wake up till near sunset, and knew instantly how long I
had slept from the golden light and long shadows outside the long window. Nobody was about,
and a sort of unnatural stillness seemed to be hovering over everything. From afar, though,
I thought I could sense a faint howling, wild and intermittent, whose quality had a slight but
baffling familiarity about it. I’m not much for psychic premonitions, but I was frightfully
uneasy from the start. There had been dreams—even worse than the ones I had been dreaming
in the weeks before—and this time they seemed hideously linked to some black and festering
reality. The whole place had a poisonous air. Afterward I reflected that certain sounds must
have filtered through to my unconscious brain during those hours of drugged sleep. My pain,
though, was very much eased; and I rose and walked without difficulty.
“Soon enough I began to see that something was wrong. Marsh and Marceline
might have been riding, but someone ought to have been getting dinner in the kitchen. Instead,
there was only silence, except for that faint distant howl or wail; and nobody answered when
I pulled the old-fashioned bell-cord to summon Scipio. Then, chancing to look up, I saw the
spreading stain on the ceiling—the bright red stain, that must have come through the floor
of Marceline’s room.
“In an instant I forgot my crippled back and hurried upstairs to find
out the worst. Everything under the sun raced through my mind as I struggled with the dampness-warped
door of that silent chamber, and most hideous of all was a terrible sense of malign fulfilment
and fatal expectedness. I had, it struck me, known all along that nameless horrors were gathering;
that something profoundly and cosmically evil had gained a foot-hold under my roof from which
only blood and tragedy could result.
“The door gave at last, and I stumbled into the large room beyond—all
dim from the branches of the great trees outside the windows. For a moment I could do nothing
but flinch at the faint evil odour that immediately struck my nostrils. Then, turning on the
electric light and glancing around, I glimpsed a nameless blasphemy on the yellow and blue rug.
“It lay face down in a great pool of dark, thickened blood, and had the
gory print of a shod human foot in the middle of its naked back. Blood was spattered everywhere—on
the walls, furniture, and floor. My knees gave way as I took in the sight, so that I had to
stumble to a chair and slump down. The thing had obviously been a human being, though its identity
was not easy to establish at first; since it was without clothes, and had most of its hair hacked
and torn from the scalp in a very crude way. It was of a deep ivory colour, and I knew that
it must have been Marceline. The shoe-print on the back made the thing seem all the more hellish.
I could not even picture the strange, loathsome tragedy which must have taken place while I
slept in the room below. When I raised my hand to wipe my dripping forehead I saw that my fingers
were sticky with blood. I shuddered, then realised that it must have come from the knob of the
door which the unknown murderer had forced shut behind him as he left. He had taken his weapon
with him, it seemed, for no instrument of death was visible here.
“As I studied the floor I saw that a line of sticky footprints like the
one on the body led away from the horror to the door. There was another blood-trail, too, and
of a less easily explainable kind; a broadish, continuous line, as if marking the path of some
huge snake. At first I concluded it must be due to something the murderer had dragged after
him. Then, noting the way some of the footprints seemed to be superimposed on it, I was forced
to believe that it had been there when the murderer left. But what crawling entity could have
been in that room with the victim and her assassin, leaving before the killer when the deed
was done? As I asked myself this question I thought I heard fresh bursts of that faint, distant
wailing.
“Finally, rousing myself from a lethargy of horror, I got on my feet again
and began following the footprints. Who the murderer was, I could not even faintly guess, nor
could I try to explain the absence of the servants. I vaguely felt that I ought to go up to
Marsh’s attic quarters, but before I had fully formulated the idea I saw that the bloody
trail was indeed taking me there. Was he himself the murderer? Had he gone mad under the strain
of the morbid situation and suddenly run amok?
“In the attic corridor the trail became faint, the prints almost ceasing
as they merged with the dark carpet. I could still, however, discern the strange single path
of the entity who had gone first; and this led straight to the closed door of Marsh’s studio,
disappearing beneath it at a point about half way from side to side. Evidently it had crossed
the threshold at a time when the door was wide open.
“Sick at heart, I tried the knob and found the door unlocked. Opening
it, I paused in the waning north light to see what fresh nightmare might be awaiting me. There
was certainly something human on the floor, and I reached for the switch to turn on the chandelier.
“But as the light flashed up my gaze left the floor and its horror—that
was Marsh, poor devil—to fix itself frantically and incredulously upon the living thing
that cowered and stared in the open doorway leading to Marsh’s bedroom. It was a tousled,
wild-eyed thing, crusted with dried blood and carrying in its hand a wicked machete which had
been one of the ornaments of the studio wall. Yet even in that awful moment I recognised it
as one whom I had thought more than a thousand miles away. It was my own boy Denis—or the
maddened wreck which had once been Denis.
“The sight of me seemed to bring back a trifle of sanity—or at least
of memory—in the poor boy. He straightened up and began to toss his head about as if trying
to shake free from some enveloping influence. I could not speak a word, but moved my lips in
an effort to get back my voice. My eyes wandered for a moment to the figure on the floor in
front of the heavily draped easel—the figure toward which the strange blood-trail led,
and which seemed to be tangled in the coils of some dark, ropy object. The shifting of my glance
apparently produced some impression in the twisted brain of the boy, for suddenly he began to
mutter in a hoarse whisper whose purport I was soon able to catch.
“‘I had to exterminate her—she was the devil—the summit
and high-priestess of all evil—the spawn of the pit—Marsh knew, and tried to warn
me. Good old Frank—I didn’t kill him, though I was ready to before I realised. But
I went down there and killed her—then that cursed hair—’
“I listened in horror as Denis choked, paused, and began again.
“‘You didn’t know—her letters got queer and I knew she
was in love with Marsh. Then she nearly stopped writing. He never mentioned her—I felt
something was wrong, and thought I ought to come back and find out. Couldn’t tell you—your
manner would have given it away. Wanted to surprise them. Got here about noon today—came
in a cab and sent the house-servants all off—let the field hands alone, for their cabins
are all out of earshot. Told McCabe to get me some things in Cape Girardeau and not bother to
come back till tomorrow. Had all the niggers take the old car and let Mary drive them to Bend
Village for a vacation—told ’em we were all going on some sort of outing and wouldn’t
need help. Said they’d better stay all night with Uncle Scip’s cousin, who keeps that
nigger boarding-house.’
“Denis was getting very incoherent now, and I strained my ears to grasp
every word. Again I thought I heard that wild, far-off wail, but the story had first place for
the present.
“‘Saw you sleeping in the parlour, and took a chance you wouldn’t
wake up. Then went upstairs on the quiet to hunt up Marsh and . . . that
woman!’
“The boy shuddered as he avoided pronouncing Marceline’s name. At
the same time I saw his eyes dilate in unison with a bursting of the distant crying, whose vague
familiarity had now become very great.
“‘She was not in her room, so I went up to the studio. Door was shut,
and I could hear voices inside. Didn’t knock—just burst in and found her posing for
the picture. Nude, but with that hellish hair all draped around her. And making all sorts of
sheep’s eyes at Marsh. He had the easel turned half away from the door, so I couldn’t
see the picture. Both of them were pretty well jolted when I shewed up, and Marsh dropped his
brush. I was in a rage and told him he’d have to shew me the portrait, but he got calmer
every minute. Told me it wasn’t quite done, but would be in a day or two—said I could
see it then—she—hadn’t seen it.
“‘But that didn’t go with me. I stepped up, and he dropped a
velvet curtain over the thing before I could see it. He was ready to fight before letting me
see it, but that—that—she—stepped up and sided with me. Said we ought to see
it. Frank got horribly worked up, and gave me a punch when I tried to get at the curtain. I
punched back and seemed to have knocked him out. Then I was almost knocked out myself by the
shriek that—that creature—gave. She’d drawn aside the hangings herself, and had
caught a look at what Marsh had been painting. I wheeled around and saw her rushing like mad
out of the room—then I saw the picture.’
“Madness flared up in the boy’s eyes again as he got to this place,
and I thought for a minute he was going to spring at me with his machete. But after a pause
he partly steadied himself.
“‘Oh, God—that thing! Don’t ever look at it! Burn it with
the hangings around it and throw the ashes into the river! Marsh knew—and was warning me.
He knew what it was—what that woman—that leopardess, or gorgon, or lamia, or whatever
she was—actually represented. He’d tried to hint to me ever since I met her in his
Paris studio, but it couldn’t be told in words. I thought they all wronged her when they
whispered horrors about her—she had me hypnotised so that I couldn’t believe the plain
facts—but this picture has caught the whole secret—the whole monstrous background!
“‘God, but Frank is an artist! That thing is the greatest piece of
work any living soul has produced since Rembrandt! It’s a crime to burn it—but it
would be a greater crime to let it exist—just as it would have been an abhorrent sin to
let—that she-daemon—exist any longer. The minute I saw it I understood what—she—was,
and what part she played in the frightful secret that has come down from the days of Cthulhu
and the Elder Ones—the secret that was nearly wiped out when Atlantis sank, but that kept
half alive in hidden traditions and allegorical myths and furtive, midnight cult-practices.
For you know she was the real thing. It wasn’t any fake. It would have been merciful if
it had been a fake. It was the old, hideous shadow that philosophers never dared mention—the
thing hinted at in the Necronomicon and symbolised in the Easter Island colossi.
“‘She thought we couldn’t see through—that the false front
would hold till we had bartered away our immortal souls. And she was half right—she’d
have got me in the end. She was only—waiting. But Frank—good old Frank—was too
much for me. He knew what it all meant, and painted it. I don’t wonder she shrieked
and ran off when she saw it. It wasn’t quite done, but God knows enough was there.
“‘Then I knew I’d got to kill her—kill her, and everything
connected with her. It was a taint that wholesome human blood couldn’t bear. There was
something else, too—but you’ll never know that if you burn the picture without looking.
I staggered down to her room with this machete that I got off the wall here, leaving Frank still
knocked out. He was breathing, though, and I knew and thanked heaven that I hadn’t killed
him.
“‘I found her in front of the mirror braiding that accursed hair.
She turned on me like a wild beast, and began spitting out her hatred of Marsh. The fact that
she’d been in love with him—and I knew she had—only made it worse. For a minute
I couldn’t move, and she came within an ace of completely hypnotising me. Then I thought
of the picture, and the spell broke. She saw the breaking in my eyes, and must have noticed
the machete, too. I never saw anything give such a wild jungle beast look as she did then. She
sprang for me with claws out like a leopard’s, but I was too quick. I swung the machete,
and it was all over.’
“Denis had to stop again there, and I saw the perspiration running down
his forehead through the spattered blood. But in a moment he hoarsely resumed.
“‘I said it was all over—but God! some of it had only just begun!
I felt I had fought the legions of Satan, and put my foot on the back of the thing I had annihilated.
Then I saw that blasphemous braid of coarse black hair begin to twist and squirm of itself.
“‘I might have known it. It was all in the old tales. That damnable
hair had a life of its own, that couldn’t be ended by killing the creature itself. I knew
I’d have to burn it, so I started to hack it off with the machete. God, but it was devilish
work! Tough—like iron wires—but I managed to do it. And it was loathsome the way the
big braid writhed and struggled in my grasp.
“‘About the time I had the last strand cut or pulled off I heard
that eldritch wailing from behind the house. You know—it’s still going off and on.
I don’t know what it is, but it must be something springing from this hellish business.
It half seems like something I ought to know but can’t quite place. It got my nerves the
first time I heard it, and I dropped the severed braid in my fright. Then, I got a worse fright—for
in another second the braid had turned on me and began to strike venomously with one of its
ends which had knotted itself up like a sort of grotesque head. I struck out with the machete,
and it turned away. Then, when I had my breath again, I saw that the monstrous thing was crawling
along the floor by itself like a great black snake. I couldn’t do anything for a while,
but when it vanished through the door I managed to pull myself together and stumble after it.
I could follow the broad, bloody trail, and I saw it led upstairs. It brought me here—and
may heaven curse me if I didn’t see it through the doorway, striking at poor dazed Marsh
like a maddened rattler as it had struck at me, finally coiling around him as a python would.
He had begun to come to, but that abominable serpent thing got him before he was on his feet.
I knew that all of that woman’s hatred was behind it, but I hadn’t the power to pull
it off. I tried, but it was too much for me. Even the machete was no good—I couldn’t
swing it freely or it would have slashed Frank to pieces. So I saw those monstrous coils tighten—saw
poor Frank crushed to death before my eyes—and all the time that awful faint howling came
from somewhere beyond the fields.
“‘That’s all. I pulled the velvet cloth over the picture and
hope it’ll never be lifted. The thing must be burnt. I couldn’t pry the coils off
poor, dead Frank—they cling to him like a leach, and seem to have lost their motion altogether.
It’s as if that snaky rope of hair has a kind of perverse fondness for the man it killed—it’s
clinging to him—embracing him. You’ll have to burn poor Frank with it—but for
God’s sake don’t forget to see it in ashes. That and the picture. They must both go.
The safety of the world demands that they go.’
“Denis might have whispered more, but a fresh burst of distant wailing
cut us short. For the first time we knew what it was, for a westerly veering wind brought articulate
words at last. We ought to have known long before, since sounds much like it had often come
from the same source. It was wrinkled Sophonisba, the ancient Zulu witch-woman who had fawned
on Marceline, keening from her cabin in a way which crowned the horrors of this nightmare tragedy.
We could both hear some of the things she howled, and knew that secret and primordial bonds
linked this savage sorceress with that other inheritor of elder secrets who had just been extirpated.
Some of the words she used betrayed her closeness to daemonic and palaeogean traditions.
“‘Iä! Iä! Shub-Niggurath! Ya-R’lyeh! N’gagi n’bulu
bwana n’lolo! Ya, yo, pore Missy Tanit, pore Missy Isis! Marse Clooloo, come up outen
de water an’ git yo chile—she done daid! She done daid! De hair ain’ got no missus
no mo’, Marse Clooloo. Ol’ Sophy, she know! Ol’ Sophy, she done got de black
stone outen Big Zimbabwe in ol’ Affriky! Ol’ Sophy, she done dance in de moonshine
roun’ de crocodile-stone befo’ de N’bangus cotch her and sell her to de ship
folks! No mo’ Tanit! No mo’ Isis! No mo’ witch-woman to keep de fire a-goin’
in de big stone place! Ya, yo! N’gagi n’bulu bwana n’lolo! Iä! Shub-Niggurath!
She daid! Ol’ Sophy know!’
“That wasn’t the end of the wailing, but it was all I could pay attention
to. The expression on my boy’s face shewed that it had reminded him of something frightful,
and the tightening of his hand on the machete boded no good. I knew he was desperate, and sprang
to disarm him if possible before he could do anything more.
“But I was too late. An old man with a bad spine doesn’t count for
much physically. There was a terrible struggle, but he had done for himself before many seconds
were over. I’m not sure yet but that he tried to kill me, too. His last panting words were
something about the need of wiping out everything that had been connected with Marceline, either
by blood or marriage.”
V.
“I wonder to this day that I didn’t go stark mad in that instant—or
in the moments and hours afterward. In front of me was the slain body of my boy—the only
human being I had to cherish—and ten feet away, in front of that shrouded easel, was the
body of his best friend, with a nameless coil of horror wound around it. Below was the scalped
corpse of that she-monster, about whom I was half-ready to believe anything. I was too dazed
to analyse the probability of the hair story—and even if I had not been, that dismal howling
from Aunt Sophy’s cabin would have been enough to quiet doubt for the nonce.
“If I’d been wise, I’d have done just what poor Denis told me
to—burned the picture and the body-grasping hair at once and without curiosity—but
I was too shaken to be wise. I suppose I muttered foolish things over my boy—and then I
remembered that the night was wearing on and that the servants would be back in the morning.
It was plain that a matter like this could never be explained, and I knew that I must cover
things up and invent a story.
“That coil of hair around Marsh was a monstrous thing. As I poked at it
with a sword which I took from the wall I almost thought I felt it tighten its grip on the dead
man. I didn’t dare touch it—and the longer I looked at it the more horrible things
I noticed about it. One thing gave me a start. I won’t mention it—but it partly explained
the need for feeding the hair with queer oils as Marceline had always done.
“In the end I decided to bury all three bodies in the cellar—with
quicklime, which I knew we had in the storehouse. It was a night of hellish work. I dug three
graves—my boy’s a long way from the other two, for I didn’t want him to be near
either the woman’s body or her hair. I was sorry I couldn’t get the coil from around
poor Marsh. It was terrible work getting them all down to the cellar. I used blankets in carting
the woman and the poor devil with the coil around him. Then I had to get two barrels of lime
from the storehouse. God must have given me strength, for I not only moved them both but filled
all three graves without a hitch.
“Some of the lime I made into whitewash. I had to take a stepladder and
fix over the parlour ceiling where the blood had oozed through. And I burned nearly everything
in Marceline’s room, scrubbing the walls and floor and heavy furniture. I washed up the
attic studio, too, and the trail and footprints that led there. And all the time I could hear
old Sophy’s wailing in the distance. The devil must have been in that creature to let her
voice go on like that. But she always was howling queer things. That’s why the field niggers
didn’t get scared or curious that night. I locked the studio door and took the key to my
room. Then I burned all my stained clothes in the fireplace. By dawn the whole house looked
quite normal so far as any casual eye could tell. I hadn’t dared touch the covered easel,
but meant to attend to that later.
“Well, the servants came back next day, and I told them all the young
folks had gone to St. Louis. None of the field hands seemed to have seen or heard anything,
and old Sophonisba’s wailing had stopped at the instant of sunrise. She was like a sphinx
after that, and never let out a word of what had been on her brooding witch-brain the day and
night before.
“Later on I pretended that Denis and Marsh and Marceline had gone back
to Paris and had a certain discreet agency mail me letters from there—letters I had fixed
up in forged handwriting. It took a good deal of deceit and reticence to explain things to various
friends, and I know people have secretly suspected me of holding something back. I had the deaths
of Marsh and Denis reported during the war, and later said Marceline had entered a convent.
Fortunately Marsh was an orphan whose eccentric ways had alienated him from his people in Louisiana.
Things might have been patched up a good deal better for me if I had had the sense to burn the
picture, sell the plantation, and give up trying to manage things with a shaken and overstrained
mind. You see what my folly has brought me to. Failing crops—hands discharged one by one—place
falling to ruin—and myself a hermit and a target for dozens of queer countryside stories.
Nobody will come around here after dark nowadays—or any other time if it can be helped.
That’s why I knew you must be a stranger.
“And why do I stay here? I can’t wholly tell you that. It’s
bound up too closely with things at the very rim of sane reality. It wouldn’t have been
so, perhaps, if I hadn’t looked at the picture. I ought to have done as poor Denis told
me. I honestly meant to burn it when I went up to that locked studio a week after the horror,
but I looked first—and that changed everything.
“No—there’s no use telling what I saw. You can, in a way, see
for yourself presently; though time and dampness have done their work. I don’t think it
can hurt you if you want to take a look, but it was different with me. I knew too much of what
it all meant.
“Denis had been right—it was the greatest triumph of human art since
Rembrandt, even though still unfinished. I grasped that at the start, and knew that poor Marsh
had justified his decadent philosophy. He was to painting what Baudelaire was to poetry—and
Marceline was the key that had unlocked his inmost stronghold of genius.
“The thing almost stunned me when I pulled aside the hangings—stunned
me before I half knew what the whole thing was. You know, it’s only partly a portrait.
Marsh had been pretty literal when he hinted that he wasn’t painting Marceline alone, but
what he saw through her and beyond her.
“Of course she was in it—was the key to it, in a sense—but her
figure only formed one point in a vast composition. She was nude except for that hideous web
of hair spun around her, and was half-seated, half-reclining on a sort of bench or divan, carved
in patterns unlike those of any known decorative tradition. There was a monstrously shaped goblet
in one hand, from which was spilling fluid whose colour I haven’t been able to place or
classify to this day—I don’t know where Marsh even got the pigments.
“The figure and the divan were in the left-hand foreground of the strangest
sort of scene I ever saw in my life. I think there was a faint suggestion of its all being a
kind of emanation from the woman’s brain, yet there was also a directly opposite suggestion—as
if she were just an evil image or hallucination conjured up by the scene itself.
“I can’t tell you now whether it’s an exterior or an interior—whether
those hellish Cyclopean vaultings are seen from the outside or the inside, or whether they are
indeed carven stone and not merely a morbid fungous arborescence. The geometry of the whole
thing is crazy—one gets the acute and obtuse angles all mixed up.
“And God! The shapes of nightmare that float around in that perpetual
daemon twilight! The blasphemies that lurk and leer and hold a Witches’ Sabbat with that
woman as a high-priestess! The black shaggy entities that are not quite goats—the crocodile-headed
beast with three legs and a dorsal row of tentacles—and the flat-nosed aegipans dancing
in a pattern that Egypt’s priests knew and called accursed!
“But the scene wasn’t Egypt—it was behind Egypt; behind
even Atlantis; behind fabled Mu, and myth-whispered Lemuria. It was the ultimate fountain-head
of all horror on this earth, and the symbolism shewed only too clearly how integral a part of
it Marceline was. I think it must be the unmentionable R’lyeh, that was not built by any
creatures of this planet—the thing Marsh and Denis used to talk about in the shadows with
hushed voices. In the picture it appears that the whole scene is deep under water—though
everybody seems to be breathing freely.
“Well—I couldn’t do anything but look and shudder, and finally
I saw that Marceline was watching me craftily out of those monstrous, dilated eyes on the canvas.
It was no mere superstition—Marsh had actually caught something of her horrible vitality
in his symphonies of line and colour, so that she still brooded and stared and hated, just as
if most of her weren’t down in the cellar under quicklime. And it was worst of all when
some of those Hecate-born snaky strands of hair began to lift themselves up from the surface
and grope out into the room toward me.
“Then it was that I knew the last final horror, and realised I was a guardian
and a prisoner forever. She was the thing from which the first dim legends of Medusa and the
Gorgons had sprung, and something in my shaken will had been captured and turned to stone at
last. Never again would I be safe from those coiling snaky strands—the strands in the picture,
and those that lay brooding under the lime near the wine casks. All too late I recalled the
tales of the virtual indestructibility, even through centuries of burial, of the hair of the
dead.
“My life since has been nothing but horror and slavery. Always there had
lurked the fear of what broods down in the cellar. In less than a month the niggers began whispering
about the great black snake that crawled around near the wine casks after dark, and about the
curious way its trail would lead to another spot six feet away. Finally I had to move everything
to another part of the cellar, for not a darky could be induced to go near the place where the
snake was seen.
“Then the field hands began talking about the black snake that visited
old Sophonisba’s cabin every night after midnight. One of them shewed me its trail—and
not long afterward I found out that Aunt Sophy herself had begun to pay strange visits to the
cellar of the big house, lingering and muttering for hours in the very spot where none of the
other blacks would go near. God, but I was glad when that old witch died! I honestly believe
she had been a priestess of some ancient and terrible tradition back in Africa. She must have
lived to be almost a hundred and fifty years old.
“Sometimes I think I hear something gliding around the house at night.
There will be a queer noise on the stairs, where the boards are loose, and the latch of my room
will rattle as if with an inward pressure. I always keep my door locked, of course. Then there
are certain mornings when I seem to catch a sickish musty odour in the corridors, and notice
a faint, ropy trail through the dust of the floors. I know I must guard the hair in the picture,
for if anything were to happen to it, there are entities in this house which would take a sure
and terrible revenge. I don’t even dare to die—for life and death are all one to those
in the clutch of what came out of R’lyeh. Something would be on hand to punish my neglect.
Medusa’s coil has got me, and it will always be the same. Never mix up with secret and
ultimate horror, young man, if you value your immortal soul.”
VI.
As the old man finished his story I saw that the small lamp had long since
burned dry, and that the large one was nearly empty. It must, I knew, be near dawn; and my ears
told me that the storm was over. The tale had held me in a half-daze, and I almost feared to
glance at the door lest it reveal an inward pressure from some unnamable source. It would be
hard to say which had the greatest hold on me—stark horror, incredulity, or a kind of morbid
fantastic curiosity. I was wholly beyond speech and had to wait for my strange host to break
the spell.
“Do you want to see—the thing?”
His voice was very low and hesitant, and I saw he was tremendously in earnest.
Of my various emotions, curiosity gained the upper hand; and I nodded silently. He rose, lighting
a candle on a nearby table and holding it high before him as he opened the door.
“Come with me—upstairs.”
I dreaded to brave those musty corridors again, but fascination downed all
my qualms. The boards creaked beneath our feet, and I trembled once when I thought I saw a faint,
rope-like line traced in the dust near the staircase.
The steps of the attic were noisy and rickety, with several of the treads missing.
I was just glad of the need of looking sharply to my footing, for it gave me an excuse not to
glance about. The attic corridor was pitch-black and heavily cobwebbed, and inch-deep with dust
except where a beaten trail led to a door on the left at the farther end. As I noticed the rotting
remains of a thick carpet I thought of the other feet which had pressed it in bygone decades—of
these, and of one thing which did not have feet.
The old man took me straight to the door at the end of the beaten path, and
fumbled a second with the rusty latch. I was acutely frightened now that I knew the picture
was so close, yet dared not retreat at this stage. In another moment my host was ushering me
into the deserted studio.
The candle light was very faint, yet served to shew most of the principal features.
I noticed the low, slanting roof, the huge enlarged dormer, the curios and trophies hung on
the walls—and most of all, the great shrouded easel in the centre of the floor. To that
easel de Russy now walked, drawing aside the dusty velvet hangings on the side turned away from
me, and motioning me silently to approach. It took a good deal of courage to make me obey, especially
when I saw how my guide’s eyes dilated in the wavering candle light as he looked at the
unveiled canvas. But again curiosity conquered everything, and I walked around to where de Russy
stood. Then I saw the damnable thing.
I did not faint—though no reader can possibly realise the effort it took
to keep me from doing so. I did cry out, but stopped short when I saw the frightened look on
the old man’s face. As I had expected, the canvas was warped, mouldy, and scabrous from
dampness and neglect; but for all that I could trace the monstrous hints of evil cosmic outsideness
that lurked all through the nameless scene’s morbid content and perverted geometry.
It was as the old man had said—a vaulted, columned hell of mingled Black
Masses and Witches’ Sabbaths—and what perfect completion could have added to it was
beyond my power to guess. Decay had only increased the utter hideousness of its wicked symbolism
and diseased suggestion, for the parts most affected by time were just those parts of the picture
which in Nature—or in that extra-cosmic realm that mocked Nature—would be apt to decay
or disintegrate.
The utmost horror of all, of course, was Marceline—and as I saw the bloated,
discoloured flesh I formed the odd fancy that perhaps the figure on the canvas had some obscure,
occult linkage with the figure which lay in quicklime under the cellar floor. Perhaps the lime
had preserved the corpse instead of destroying it—but could it have preserved those black,
malign eyes that glared and mocked at me from their painted hell?
And there was something else about the creature which I could not fail to notice—something
which de Russy had not been able to put into words, but which perhaps had something to do with
Denis’ wish to kill all those of his blood who had dwelt under the same roof with her.
Whether Marsh knew, or whether the genius in him painted it without his knowing, none could
say. But Denis and his father could not have known till they saw the picture.
Surpassing all in horror was the streaming black hair—which covered the
rotting body, but which was itself not even slightly decayed. All I had heard of it was
amply verified. It was nothing human, this ropy, sinuous, half-oily, half-crinkly flood of serpent
darkness. Vile, independent life proclaimed itself at every unnatural twist and convolution,
and the suggestion of numberless reptilian heads at the out-turned ends was far too marked
to be illusory or accidental.
The blasphemous thing held me like a magnet. I was helpless, and did not wonder
at the myth of the gorgon’s glance which turned all beholders to stone. Then I thought
I saw a change come over the thing. The leering features perceptibly moved, so that the rotting
jaw fell, allowing the thick, beast-like lips to disclose a row of pointed yellow fangs. The
pupils of the fiendish eyes dilated, and the eyes themselves seemed to bulge outward. And the
hair—that accursed hair! It had begun to rustle and wave perceptibly, the snake-heads
all turning toward de Russy and vibrating as if to strike!
Reason deserted me altogether, and before I knew what I was doing I drew my
automatic and sent a shower of twelve steel-jacketed bullets through the shocking canvas. The
whole thing at once fell to pieces, even the frame toppling from the easel and clattering to
the dust-covered floor. But though this horror was shattered, another had risen before me in
the form of de Russy himself, whose maddened shrieks as he saw the picture vanish were almost
as terrible as the picture itself had been.
With a half-articulate scream of “God, now you’ve done it!”
the frantic old man seized me violently by the arm and commenced to drag me out of the room
and down the rickety stairs. He had dropped the candle in his panic; but dawn was near, and
some faint grey light was filtering in through the dust-covered windows. I tripped and stumbled
repeatedly, but never for a moment would my guide slacken his pace.
“Run!” he shrieked, “run for your life! You don’t know
what you’ve done! I never told you the whole thing! There were things I had to do—the
picture talked to me and told me. I had to guard and keep it—now the worst will happen!
She and that hair will come up out of their graves, for God knows what purpose!
“Hurry, man! For God’s sake let’s get out of here while there’s
time. If you have a car take me along to Cape Girardeau with you. It may get me in the end,
anywhere, but I’ll give it a run for its money. Out of here—quick!”
As we reached the ground floor I became aware of a slow, curious thumping from
the rear of the house, followed by a sound of a door shutting. De Russy had not heard the thumping,
but the other noise caught his ear and drew from him the most terrible shriek that ever sounded
in human throat.
“Oh, God—great God—that was the cellar door—she’s
coming—”
By this time I was desperately wrestling with the rusty latch and sagging hinges
of the great front door—almost as frantic as my host now that I heard the slow, thumping
tread approaching from the unknown rear rooms of the accursed mansion. The night’s rain
had warped the oaken planks, and the heavy door stuck and resisted even more strongly than it
had when I forced an entrance the evening before.
Somewhere a plank creaked beneath the foot of whatever was walking, and the
sound seemed to snap the last cord of sanity in the poor old man. With a roar like that of a
maddened bull he released his grip on me and made a plunge to the right, through the open door
of a room which I judged had been a parlour. A second later, just as I got the front door open
and was making my own escape, I heard the tinkling clatter of broken glass and knew he had leapt
through a window. And as I bounded off the sagging porch to commence my mad race down the long,
weed-grown drive I thought I could catch the thud of dead, dogged footfalls which did not follow
me, but which kept leadenly on through the door of the cobwebbed parlour.
I looked backward only twice as I plunged heedlessly through the burrs and
briers of that abandoned drive, past the dying lindens and grotesque scrub-oaks, in the grey
pallor of a cloudy November dawn. The first time was when an acrid smell overtook me, and I
thought of the candle de Russy had dropped in the attic studio. By then I was comfortably near
the road, on the high place from which the roof of the distant house was clearly visible above
its encircling trees; and just as I expected, thick clouds of smoke were billowing out of the
attic dormers and curling upward into the leaden heavens. I thanked the powers of creation that
an immemorial curse was about to be purged by fire and blotted from the earth.
But in the next instant came that second backward look in which I glimpsed
two other things—things that cancelled most of the relief and gave me a supreme shock from
which I shall never recover. I have said that I was on a high part of the drive, from which
much of the plantation behind me was visible. This vista included not only the house and its
trees but some of the abandoned and partly flooded flat land beside the river, and several bends
of the weed-choked drive I had been so hastily traversing. In both of these latter places I now
beheld sights—or suspicions of sights—which I wish devoutly I could deny.
It was a faint, distant scream which made me turn back again, and as I did
so I caught a trace of motion on the dull grey marshy plain behind the house. At that distance
human figures are very small, yet I thought the motion resolved itself into two of these—pursuer
and pursued. I even thought I saw the dark-clothed leading figure overtaken and seized by the
bald, naked figure in the rear—overtaken, seized, and dragged violently in the direction
of the now burning house.
But I could not watch the outcome, for at once a nearer sight obtruded itself—a
suggestion of motion among the underbrush at a point some distance back along the deserted drive.
Unmistakably, the weeds and bushes and briers were swaying as no wind could sway them; swaying
as if some large, swift serpent were wriggling purposefully along on the ground in pursuit of
me.
That was all I could stand. I scrambled along madly for the gate, heedless
of torn clothing and bleeding scratches, and jumped into the roadster parked under the great
evergreen tree. It was a bedraggled, rain-drenched sight; but the works were unharmed and I
had no trouble in starting the thing. I went on blindly in the direction the car was headed
for; nothing was in my mind but to get away from that frightful region of nightmares and cacodaemons—to
get away as quickly and as far as gasoline could take me.
About three or four miles along the road a farmer hailed me—a kindly,
drawling fellow of middle age and considerable native intelligence. I was glad to slow down
and ask directions, though I knew I must present a strange enough aspect. The man readily told
me the way to Cape Girardeau, and inquired where I had come from in such a state at such an
early hour. Thinking it best to say little, I merely mentioned that I had been caught in the
night’s rain and had taken shelter at a nearby farmhouse, afterward losing my way in the
underbrush trying to find my car.
“At a farmhouse, eh? Wonder whose it could a ben. Ain’t nothin’
standin’ this side o’ Jim Ferris’ place acrost Barker’s Crick, an’
that’s all o’ twenty miles by the rud.”
I gave a start, and wondered what fresh mystery this portended. Then I asked
my informant if he had overlooked the large ruined plantation house whose ancient gate bordered
the road not far back.
“Funny ye sh’d recolleck that, stranger! Must a ben here afore some
time. But that house ain’t there now. Burnt down five or six years ago—and they did
tell some queer stories about it.”
I shuddered.
“You mean Riverside—ol’ man de Russy’s place. Queer goin’s
on there fifteen or twenty years ago. Ol’ man’s boy married a gal from abroad, and
some folks thought she was a mighty odd sort. Didn’t like the looks of her. Then she and
the boy went off sudden, and later on the ol’ man said he was kilt in the war. But some
o’ the niggers hinted queer things. Got around at last that the ol’ fellow fell in
love with the gal himself and kilt her and the boy. That place was sure enough haunted by a
black snake, mean that what it may.
“Then five or six years ago the ol’ man disappeared and the house
burned down. Some do say he was burnt up in it. It was a mornin’ after a rainy night just
like this, when lots o’ folks heard an awful yellin’ acrost the fields in old de Russy’s
voice. When they stopped and looked, they see the house goin’ up in smoke quick as a wink—that
place was all like tinder anyhow, rain or no rain. Nobody never seen the ol’ man agin,
but onct in a while they tell of the ghost of that big black snake glidin’ aroun’.
“What d’ye make of it, anyhow? You seem to hev knowed the place.
Didn’t ye ever hear tell of the de Russys? What d’ye reckon was the trouble with that
gal young Denis married? She kinder made everybody shiver and feel hateful, though ye couldn’t
never tell why.”
I was trying to think, but that process was almost beyond me now. The house
burned down years ago? Then where, and under what conditions, had I passed the night? And why
did I know what I knew of these things? Even as I pondered I saw a hair on my coat sleeve—the
short, grey hair of an old man.
In the end I drove on without telling anything. But I did hint that gossip
was wronging the poor old planter who had suffered so much. I made it clear—as if from
distant but authentic reports wafted among friends—that if anyone was to blame for the
trouble at Riverside it was the woman, Marceline. She was not suited to Missouri ways, I said,
and it was too bad that Denis had ever married her.
More I did not intimate, for I felt that the de Russys, with their proudly
cherished honour and high, sensitive spirits, would not wish me to say more. They had borne
enough, God knows, without the countryside guessing what a daemon of the pit—what a gorgon
of the elder blasphemies—had come to flaunt their ancient and stainless name.
Nor was it right that the neighbours should know that other horror which my
strange host of the night could not bring himself to tell me—that horror which he must
have learned, as I learned it, from details in the lost masterpiece of poor Frank Marsh.
It would be too hideous if they knew that the one-time heiress of Riverside—the
accursed gorgon or lamia whose hateful crinkly coil of serpent-hair must even now be brooding
and twining vampirically around an artist’s skeleton in a lime-packed grave beneath a charred
foundation—was faintly, subtly, yet to the eyes of genius unmistakably the scion of Zimbabwe’s
most primal grovellers. No wonder she owned a link with that old witch-woman Sophonisba—for,
though in deceitfully slight proportion, Marceline was a negress.


Polaris


Into the north window of my chamber glows the Pole Star with uncanny light. All through the
long hellish hours of blackness it shines there. And in the autumn of the year, when the winds
from the north curse and whine, and the red-leaved trees of the swamp mutter things to one another
in the small hours of the morning under the horned waning moon, I sit by the casement and watch
that star. Down from the heights reels the glittering Cassiopeia as the hours wear on, while
Charles’ Wain lumbers up from behind the vapour-soaked swamp trees that sway in the night-wind.
Just before dawn Arcturus winks ruddily from above the cemetery on the low hillock, and Coma
Berenices shimmers weirdly afar off in the mysterious east; but still the Pole Star leers down
from the same place in the black vault, winking hideously like an insane watching eye which
strives to convey some strange message, yet recalls nothing save that it once had a message
to convey. Sometimes, when it is cloudy, I can sleep.
Well do I remember the night of the great Aurora, when over the swamp played
the shocking coruscations of the daemon-light. After the beams came clouds, and then I slept.
And it was under a horned waning moon that I saw the city for the first time.
Still and somnolent did it lie, on a strange plateau in a hollow betwixt strange peaks. Of ghastly
marble were its walls and its towers, its columns, domes, and pavements. In the marble streets
were marble pillars, the upper parts of which were carven into the images of grave bearded men.
The air was warm and stirred not. And overhead, scarce ten degrees from the zenith, glowed that
watching Pole Star. Long did I gaze on the city, but the day came not. When the red Aldebaran,
which blinked low in the sky but never set, had crawled a quarter of the way around the horizon,
I saw light and motion in the houses and the streets. Forms strangely robed, but at once noble
and familiar, walked abroad, and under the horned waning moon men talked wisdom in a tongue
which I understood, though it was unlike any language I had ever known. And when the red Aldebaran
had crawled more than half way around the horizon, there were again darkness and silence.
When I awaked, I was not as I had been. Upon my memory was graven the vision
of the city, and within my soul had arisen another and vaguer recollection, of whose nature
I was not then certain. Thereafter, on the cloudy nights when I could sleep, I saw the city
often; sometimes under that horned waning moon, and sometimes under the hot yellow rays of a
sun which did not set, but which wheeled low around the horizon. And on the clear nights the
Pole Star leered as never before.
Gradually I came to wonder what might be my place in that city on the strange
plateau betwixt strange peaks. At first content to view the scene as an all-observant uncorporeal
presence, I now desired to define my relation to it, and to speak my mind amongst the grave
men who conversed each day in the public squares. I said to myself, “This is no dream,
for by what means can I prove the greater reality of that other life in the house of stone and
brick south of the sinister swamp and the cemetery on the low hillock, where the Pole Star peers
into my north window each night?”
One night as I listened to the discourse in the large square containing many
statues, I felt a change; and perceived that I had at last a bodily form. Nor was I a stranger
in the streets of Olathoë, which lies on the plateau of Sarkis, betwixt the peaks Noton
and Kadiphonek. It was my friend Alos who spoke, and his speech was one that pleased my soul,
for it was the speech of a true man and patriot. That night had the news come of Daikos’
fall, and of the advance of the Inutos; squat, hellish, yellow fiends who five years ago had
appeared out of the unknown west to ravage the confines of our kingdom, and finally to besiege
our towns. Having taken the fortified places at the foot of the mountains, their way now lay
open to the plateau, unless every citizen could resist with the strength of ten men. For the
squat creatures were mighty in the arts of war, and knew not the scruples of honour which held
back our tall, grey-eyed men of Lomar from ruthless conquest.
Alos, my friend, was commander of all the forces on the plateau, and in him
lay the last hope of our country. On this occasion he spoke of the perils to be faced, and exhorted
the men of Olathoë, bravest of the Lomarians, to sustain the traditions of their ancestors,
who when forced to move southward from Zobna before the advance of the great ice-sheet (even
as our descendants must some day flee from the land of Lomar), valiantly and victoriously swept
aside the hairy, long-armed, cannibal Gnophkehs that stood in their way. To me Alos denied a
warrior’s part, for I was feeble and given to strange faintings when subjected to stress
and hardships. But my eyes were the keenest in the city, despite the long hours I gave each
day to the study of the Pnakotic manuscripts and the wisdom of the Zobnarian Fathers; so my
friend, desiring not to doom me to inaction, rewarded me with that duty which was second to
nothing in importance. To the watch-tower of Thapnen he sent me, there to serve as the eyes
of our army. Should the Inutos attempt to gain the citadel by the narrow pass behind the peak
Noton, and thereby surprise the garrison, I was to give the signal of fire which would warn
the waiting soldiers and save the town from immediate disaster.
Alone I mounted the tower, for every man of stout body was needed in the passes
below. My brain was sore dazed with excitement and fatigue, for I had not slept in many days;
yet was my purpose firm, for I loved my native land of Lomar, and the marble city of Olathoë
that lies betwixt the peaks of Noton and Kadiphonek.
But as I stood in the tower’s topmost chamber, I beheld the horned waning
moon, red and sinister, quivering through the vapours that hovered over the distant valley of
Banof. And through an opening in the roof glittered the pale Pole Star, fluttering as if alive,
and leering like a fiend and tempter. Methought its spirit whispered evil counsel, soothing
me to traitorous somnolence with a damnable rhythmical promise which it repeated over and over:

“Slumber, watcher, till the spheres
Six and twenty thousand years
Have revolv’d, and I return
To the spot where now I burn.
Other stars anon shall rise
To the axis of the skies;
Stars that soothe and stars that bless
With a sweet forgetfulness:
Only when my round is o’er
Shall the past disturb thy door.”


Vainly did I struggle with my drowsiness, seeking to connect these strange words with some lore
of the skies which I had learnt from the Pnakotic manuscripts. My head, heavy and reeling, drooped
to my breast, and when next I looked up it was in a dream; with the Pole Star grinning at me
through a window from over the horrible swaying trees of a dream-swamp. And I am still dreaming.
In my shame and despair I sometimes scream frantically, begging the dream-creatures
around me to waken me ere the Inutos steal up the pass behind the peak Noton and take the citadel
by surprise; but these creatures are daemons, for they laugh at me and tell me I am not dreaming.
They mock me whilst I sleep, and whilst the squat yellow foe may be creeping silently upon us.
I have failed in my duty and betrayed the marble city of Olathoë; I have proven false to
Alos, my friend and commander. But still these shadows of my dream deride me. They say there
is no land of Lomar, save in my nocturnal imaginings; that in those realms where the Pole Star
shines high and red Aldebaran crawls low around the horizon, there has been naught save ice
and snow for thousands of years, and never a man save squat yellow creatures, blighted by the
cold, whom they call “Esquimaux”.
And as I writhe in my guilty agony, frantic to save the city whose peril every
moment grows, and vainly striving to shake off this unnatural dream of a house of stone and
brick south of a sinister swamp and a cemetery on a low hillock; the Pole Star, evil and monstrous,
leers down from the black vault, winking hideously like an insane watching eye which strives
to convey some strange message, yet recalls nothing save that it once had a message to convey.


Sweet Ermengarde

Chapter I.A Simple Rustic Maid

Ermengarde Stubbs was the beauteous blonde daughter of Hiram Stubbs, a poor but honest farmer-bootlegger
of Hogton, Vt. Her name was originally Ethyl Ermengarde, but her father persuaded her to drop
the praenomen after the passage of the 18th Amendment, averring that it made him thirsty by
reminding him of ethyl alcohol, C2H5OH.
His own products contained mostly methyl or wood alcohol, CH3OH.
Ermengarde confessed to sixteen summers, and branded as mendacious all reports to the effect
that she was thirty. She had large black eyes, a prominent Roman nose, light hair which was
never dark at the roots except when the local drug store was short on supplies, and a beautiful
but inexpensive complexion. She was about 5ft 5.33...in tall, weighed 115.47 lbs. on her father’s corn scales—also
off them—and was adjudged most lovely by all the village swains who admired her father’s
farm and liked his liquid crops.
Ermengarde’s hand was sought in matrimony by two ardent lovers. ’Squire
Hardman, who had a mortgage on the old home, was very rich and elderly. He was dark and cruelly
handsome, and always rode horseback and carried a riding-crop. Long had he sought the radiant
Ermengarde, and now his ardour was fanned to fever heat by a secret known to him alone—for
upon the humble acres of Farmer Stubbs he had discovered a vein of rich GOLD!!
“Aha!” said he, “I will win the maiden ere her parent knows of his unsuspected
wealth, and join to my fortune a greater fortune still!” And so he began to call twice
a week instead of once as before.
But alas for the sinister designs of a villain—’Squire Hardman
was not the only suitor for the fair one. Close by the village dwelt another—the handsome
Jack Manly, whose curly yellow hair had won the sweet Ermengarde’s affection when both
were toddling youngsters at the village school. Jack had long been too bashful to declare his
passion, but one day while strolling along a shady lane by the old mill with Ermengarde, he
had found courage to utter that which was within his heart.
“O light of my life,” said he, “my soul is so overburdened
that I must speak! Ermengarde, my ideal [he pronounced it i-deel!], life has become an empty
thing without you. Beloved of my spirit, behold a suppliant kneeling in the dust before thee.
Ermengarde—oh, Ermengarde, raise me to an heaven of joy and say that you will some day
be mine! It is true that I am poor, but have I not youth and strength to fight my way to fame?
This I can do only for you, dear Ethyl—pardon me, Ermengarde—my only, my most precious—”
but here he paused to wipe his eyes and mop his brow, and the fair responded:
“Jack—my angel—at last—I mean, this is so unexpected
and quite unprecedented! I had never dreamed that you entertained sentiments of affection in
connexion with one so lowly as Farmer Stubbs’ child—for I am still but a child!
Such is your natural nobility that I had feared—I mean thought—you would be blind
to such slight charms as I possess, and that you would seek your fortune in the great city;
there meeting and wedding one of those more comely damsels whose splendour we observe in fashion
books.
“But, Jack, since it is really I whom you adore, let us waive all needless
circumlocution. Jack—my darling—my heart has long been susceptible to your manly
graces. I cherish an affection for thee—consider me thine own and be sure to buy the ring
at Perkins’ hardware store where they have such nice imitation diamonds in the window.”
“Ermengarde, me love!”
“Jack—my precious!”
“My darling!”
“My own!”
“My Gawd!”
[Curtain]
Chapter II.And the Villain Still Pursued Her
But these tender passages, sacred though their fervour, did not pass unobserved
by profane eyes; for crouched in the bushes and gritting his teeth was the dastardly ’Squire
Hardman! When the lovers had finally strolled away he leapt out into the lane, viciously twirling
his moustache and riding-crop, and kicking an unquestionably innocent cat who was also out strolling.
“Curses!” he cried—Hardman, not the cat—“I am
foiled in my plot to get the farm and the girl! But Jack Manly shall never succeed! I am a man
of power—and we shall see!”
Thereupon he repaired to the humble Stubbs’ cottage, where he found the
fond father in the still-cellar washing bottles under the supervision of the gentle wife and
mother, Hannah Stubbs. Coming directly to the point, the villain spoke:
“Farmer Stubbs, I cherish a tender affection of long standing for your
lovely offspring, Ethyl Ermengarde. I am consumed with love, and wish her hand in matrimony.
Always a man of few words, I will not descend to euphemism. Give me the girl or I will foreclose
the mortgage and take the old home!”
“But, Sir,” pleaded the distracted Stubbs while his stricken spouse
merely glowered, “I am sure the child’s affections are elsewhere placed.”
“She must be mine!” sternly snapped the sinister ’squire.
“I will make her love me—none shall resist my will! Either she becomes muh wife
or the old homestead goes!”
And with a sneer and flick of his riding-crop ’Squire Hardman strode
out into the night.
Scarce had he departed, when there entered by the back door the radiant lovers,
eager to tell the senior Stubbses of their new-found happiness. Imagine the universal consternation
which reigned when all was known! Tears flowed like white ale, till suddenly Jack remembered
he was the hero and raised his head, declaiming in appropriately virile accents:
“Never shall the fair Ermengarde be offered up to this beast as a sacrifice
while I live! I shall protect her—she is mine, mine, mine—and then some! Fear not,
dear father and mother to be—I will defend you all! You shall have the old home still
[adverb, not noun—although Jack was by no means out of sympathy with Stubbs’ kind
of farm produce] and I shall lead to the altar the beauteous Ermengarde, loveliest of her sex!
To perdition with the crool ’squire and his ill-gotten gold—the right shall always
win, and a hero is always in the right! I will go to the great city and there make a fortune
to save you all ere the mortgage fall due! Farewell, my love—I leave you now in tears,
but I shall return to pay off the mortgage and claim you as my bride!”
“Jack, my protector!”
“Ermie, my tootsie roll!”
“Dearest!”
“Darling!—and don’t forget that ring at Perkins’.”
“Oh!”
“Ah!”
[Curtain]
Chapter III.A Dastardly Act
But the resourceful ’Squire Hardman was not so easily to be foiled. Close
by the village lay a disreputable settlement of unkempt shacks, populated by a shiftless scum
who lived by thieving and other odd jobs. Here the devilish villain secured two accomplices—ill-favoured
fellows who were very clearly no gentlemen. And in the night the evil three broke into the Stubbs
cottage and abducted the fair Ermengarde, taking her to a wretched hovel in the settlement and
placing her under the charge of Mother Maria, a hideous old hag. Farmer Stubbs was quite distracted,
and would have advertised in the papers if the cost had been less than a cent a word for each
insertion. Ermengarde was firm, and never wavered in her refusal to wed the villain.
“Aha, my proud beauty,” quoth he, “I have ye in me power,
and sooner or later I will break that will of thine! Meanwhile think of your poor old father
and mother as turned out of hearth and home and wandering helpless through the meadows!”
“Oh, spare them, spare them!” said the maiden.
“Neverr . . . ha ha ha ha!” leered the brute.
And so the cruel days sped on, while all in ignorance young Jack Manly was
seeking fame and fortune in the great city.
Chapter IV.Subtle Villainy
One day as ’Squire Hardman sat in the front parlour of his expensive
and palatial home, indulging in his favourite pastime of gnashing his teeth and swishing his
riding-crop, a great thought came to him; and he cursed aloud at the statue of Satan on the
onyx mantelpiece.
“Fool that I am!” he cried. “Why did I ever waste all this
trouble on the girl when I can get the farm by simply foreclosing? I never thought of that!
I will let the girl go, take the farm, and be free to wed some fair city maid like the leading
lady of that burlesque troupe which played last week at the Town Hall!”
And so he went down to the settlement, apologised to Ermengarde, let her go
home, and went home himself to plot new crimes and invent new modes of villainy.
The days wore on, and the Stubbses grew very sad over the coming loss of their
home and still but nobody seemed able to do anything about it. One day a party of hunters from
the city chanced to stray over the old farm, and one of them found the gold!! Hiding his discovery
from his companions, he feigned rattlesnake-bite and went to the Stubbs’ cottage for aid
of the usual kind. Ermengarde opened the door and saw him. He also saw her, and in that moment
resolved to win her and the gold. “For my old mother’s sake I must”—he
cried loudly to himself. “No sacrifice is too great!”
Chapter V.The City Chap
Algernon Reginald Jones was a polished man of the world from the great city,
and in his sophisticated hands our poor little Ermengarde was as a mere child. One could almost
believe that sixteen-year-old stuff. Algy was a fast worker, but never crude. He could have
taught Hardman a thing or two about finesse in sheiking. Thus only a week after his advent to
the Stubbs family circle, where he lurked like the vile serpent that he was, he had persuaded
the heroine to elope! It was in the night that she went leaving a note for her parents, sniffing
the familiar mash for the last time, and kissing the cat goodbye—touching stuff! On the
train Algernon became sleepy and slumped down in his seat, allowing a paper to fall out of his
pocket by accident. Ermengarde, taking advantage of her supposed position as a bride-elect,
picked up the folded sheet and read its perfumed expanse—when lo! she almost fainted!
It was a love letter from another woman!!
“Perfidious deceiver!” she whispered at the sleeping Algernon,
“so this is all that your boasted fidelity amounts to! I am done with you for all eternity!”
So saying, she pushed him out the window and settled down for a much needed
rest.
Chapter VI.Alone in the Great City
When the noisy train pulled into the dark station at the city, poor helpless
Ermengarde was all alone without the money to get back to Hogton. “Oh why,” she
sighed in innocent regret, “didn’t I take his pocketbook before I pushed him out?
Oh well, I should worry! He told me all about the city so I can easily earn enough to get home
if not to pay off the mortgage!”
But alas for our little heroine—work is not easy for a greenhorn to secure,
so for a week she was forced to sleep on park benches and obtain food from the bread-line. Once
a wily and wicked person, perceiving her helplessness, offered her a position as dish-washer
in a fashionable and depraved cabaret; but our heroine was true to her rustic ideals and refused
to work in such a gilded and glittering palace of frivolity—especially since she was offered
only $3.00 per week with meals but no board. She tried to look up Jack Manly, her one-time lover,
but he was nowhere to be found. Perchance, too, he would not have known her; for in her poverty
she had perforce become a brunette again, and Jack had not beheld her in that state since school
days. One day she found a neat but costly purse in the park; and after seeing that there was
not much in it, took it to the rich lady whose card proclaimed her ownership. Delighted beyond
words at the honesty of this forlorn waif, the aristocratic Mrs. Van Itty adopted Ermengarde
to replace the little one who had been stolen from her so many years ago. “How like my
precious Maude,” she sighed, as she watched the fair brunette return to blondeness. And
so several weeks passed, with the old folks at home tearing their hair and the wicked ’Squire
Hardman chuckling devilishly.
Chapter VII.Happy Ever Afterward
One day the wealthy heiress Ermengarde S. Van Itty hired a new second assistant
chauffeur. Struck by something familiar in his face, she looked again and gasped. Lo! it was
none other than the perfidious Algernon Reginald Jones, whom she had pushed from a car window
on that fateful day! He had survived—this much was almost immediately evident. Also, he
had wed the other woman, who had run away with the milkman and all the money in the house. Now
wholly humbled, he asked forgiveness of our heroine, and confided to her the whole tale of the
gold on her father’s farm. Moved beyond words, she raised his salary a dollar a month
and resolved to gratify at last that always unquenchable anxiety to relieve the worry of the
old folks. So one bright day Ermengarde motored back to Hogton and arrived at the farm just
as ’Squire Hardman was foreclosing the mortgage and ordering the old folks out.
“Stay, villain!” she cried, flashing a colossal roll of bills.
“You are foiled at last! Here is your money—now go, and never darken our humble
door again!”
Then followed a joyous reunion, whilst the ’squire twisted his moustache
and riding-crop in bafflement and dismay. But hark! What is this? Footsteps sound on the old
gravel walk, and who should appear but our hero, Jack Manly—worn and seedy, but radiant
of face. Seeking at once the downcast villain, he said:
“’Squire—lend me a ten-spot, will you? I have just come back
from the city with my beauteous bride, the fair Bridget Goldstein, and need something to start
things on the old farm.” Then turning to the Stubbses, he apologised for his inability
to pay off the mortgage as agreed.
“Don’t mention it,” said Ermengarde, “prosperity has
come to us, and I will consider it sufficient payment if you will forget forever the foolish
fancies of our childhood.”
All this time Mrs. Van Itty had been sitting in the motor waiting for Ermengarde;
but as she lazily eyed the sharp-faced Hannah Stubbs a vague memory started from the back of
her brain. Then it all came to her, and she shrieked accusingly at the agrestic matron.
“You—you—Hannah Smith—I know you now! Twenty-eight
years ago you were my baby Maude’s nurse and stole her from the cradle!! Where, oh, where
is my child?” Then a thought came as the lightning in a murky sky. “Ermengarde—you
say she is your daughter. . . . She is mine! Fate has restored to me my
old chee-ild—my tiny Maudie!—Ermengarde—Maude—come to your mother’s
loving arms!!!”
But Ermengarde was doing some tall thinking. How could she get away with the
sixteen-year-old stuff if she had been stolen twenty-eight years ago? And if she was not Stubbs’
daughter the gold would never be hers. Mrs. Van Itty was rich, but ’Squire Hardman was
richer. So, approaching the dejected villain, she inflicted upon him the last terrible punishment.
“’Squire, dear,” she murmured, “I have reconsidered
all. I love you and your naive strength. Marry me at once or I will have you prosecuted for
that kidnapping last year. Foreclose your mortgage and enjoy with me the gold your cleverness
discovered. Come, dear!” And the poor dub did.
THE END.


The Book


My memories are very confused. There is even much doubt as to where they begin; for at times
I feel appalling vistas of years stretching behind me, while at other times it seems as if the
present moment were an isolated point in a grey, formless infinity. I am not even certain how
I am communicating this message. While I know I am speaking, I have a vague impression that
some strange and perhaps terrible mediation will be needed to bear what I say to the points
where I wish to be heard. My identity, too, is bewilderingly cloudy. I seem to have suffered
a great shock—perhaps from some utterly monstrous outgrowth of my cycles of unique, incredible
experience.
These cycles of experience, of course, all stem from that worm-riddled book.
I remember when I found it—in a dimly lighted place near the black, oily river where the
mists always swirl. That place was very old, and the ceiling-high shelves full of rotting volumes
reached back endlessly through windowless inner rooms and alcoves. There were, besides, great
formless heaps of books on the floor and in crude bins; and it was in one of these heaps that
I found the thing. I never learned its title, for the early pages were missing; but it fell
open toward the end and gave me a glimpse of something which sent my senses reeling.
There was a formula—a sort of list of things to say and do—which
I recognised as something black and forbidden; something which I had read of before in furtive
paragraphs of mixed abhorrence and fascination penned by those strange ancient delvers into
the universe’s guarded secrets whose decaying texts I loved to absorb. It was a key—a
guide—to certain gateways and transitions of which mystics have dreamed and whispered
since the race was young, and which lead to freedoms and discoveries beyond the three dimensions
and realms of life and matter that we know. Not for centuries had any man recalled its vital
substance or known where to find it, but this book was very old indeed. No printing-press, but
the hand of some half-crazed monk, had traced these ominous Latin phrases in uncials of awesome
antiquity.
I remember how the old man leered and tittered, and made a curious sign with
his hand when I bore it away. He had refused to take pay for it, and only long afterward did
I guess why. As I hurried home through those narrow, winding, mist-choked waterfront streets
I had a frightful impression of being stealthily followed by softly padding feet. The centuried,
tottering houses on both sides seemed alive with a fresh and morbid malignity—as if some
hitherto closed channel of evil understanding had abruptly been opened. I felt that those walls
and overhanging gables of mildewed brick and fungous plaster and timber—with fishy, eye-like,
diamond-paned windows that leered—could hardly desist from advancing and crushing me . . .
yet I had read only the least fragment of that blasphemous rune before closing the book and
bringing it away.
I remember how I read the book at last—white-faced, and locked in the
attic room that I had long devoted to strange searchings. The great house was very still, for
I had not gone up till after midnight. I think I had a family then—though the details
are very uncertain—and I know there were many servants. Just what the year was, I cannot
say; for since then I have known many ages and dimensions, and have had all my notions of time
dissolved and refashioned. It was by the light of candles that I read—I recall the relentless
dripping of the wax—and there were chimes that came every now and then from distant belfries.
I seemed to keep track of those chimes with a peculiar intentness, as if I feared to hear some
very remote, intruding note among them.
Then came the first scratching and fumbling at the dormer window that looked
out high above the other roofs of the city. It came as I droned aloud the ninth verse of that
primal lay, and I knew amidst my shudders what it meant. For he who passes the gateways always
wins a shadow, and never again can he be alone. I had evoked—and the book was indeed all
I had suspected. That night I passed the gateway to a vortex of twisted time and vision, and
when morning found me in the attic room I saw in the walls and shelves and fittings that which
I had never seen before.
Nor could I ever after see the world as I had known it. Mixed with the present
scene was always a little of the past and a little of the future, and every once-familiar object
loomed alien in the new perspective brought by my widened sight. From then on I walked in a
fantastic dream of unknown and half-known shapes; and with each new gateway crossed, the less
plainly could I recognise the things of the narrow sphere to which I had so long been bound.
What I saw about me none else saw; and I grew doubly silent and aloof lest I be thought mad.
Dogs had a fear of me, for they felt the outside shadow which never left my side. But still
I read more—in hidden, forgotten books and scrolls to which my new vision led me—and
pushed through fresh gateways of space and being and life-patterns toward the core of the unknown
cosmos.
I remember the night I made the five concentric circles of fire on the floor,
and stood in the innermost one chanting that monstrous litany the messenger from Tartary had
brought. The walls melted away, and I was swept by a black wind through gulfs of fathomless
grey with the needle-like pinnacles of unknown mountains miles below me. After a while there
was utter blackness, and then the light of myriad stars forming strange, alien constellations.
Finally I saw a green-litten plain far below me, and discerned on it the twisted towers of a
city built in no fashion I had ever known or read of or dreamed of. As I floated closer to that
city I saw a great square building of stone in an open space, and felt a hideous fear clutching
at me. I screamed and struggled, and after a blankness was again in my attic room, sprawled
flat over the five phosphorescent circles on the floor. In that night’s wandering there
was no more of strangeness than in many a former night’s wandering; but there was more
of terror because I knew I was closer to those outside gulfs and worlds than I had ever been
before. Thereafter I was more cautious with my incantations, for I had no wish to be cut off
from my body and from the earth in unknown abysses whence I could never return.


The Case of Charles Dexter Ward

“The essential Saltes of Animals may be so prepared and preserved, that an
ingenious Man may have the whole Ark of Noah in his own Studie, and raise the fine Shape of an
Animal out of its Ashes at his Pleasure; and by the lyke Method from the essential Saltes of humane
Dust, a Philosopher may, without any criminal Necromancy, call up the Shape of any dead Ancestour
from the Dust whereinto his Bodie has been incinerated.”
BORELLUS
I. A Result and a Prologue1.

From a private hospital for the insane near Providence, Rhode Island, there recently disappeared an
exceedingly singular person. He bore the name of Charles Dexter Ward, and was placed under
restraint most reluctantly by the grieving father who had watched his aberration grow from a mere
eccentricity to a dark mania involving both a possibility of murderous tendencies and a profound
and peculiar change in the apparent contents of his mind. Doctors confess themselves quite baffled
by his case, since it presented oddities of a general physiological as well as psychological
character.
In the first place, the patient seemed oddly older than his twenty-six years would
warrant. Mental disturbance, it is true, will age one rapidly; but the face of this young man had
taken on a subtle cast which only the very aged normally acquire. In the second place, his organic
processes shewed a certain queerness of proportion which nothing in medical experience can
parallel. Respiration and heart action had a baffling lack of symmetry; the voice was lost, so that
no sounds above a whisper were possible; digestion was incredibly prolonged and minimised, and
neural reactions to standard stimuli bore no relation at all to anything heretofore recorded,
either normal or pathological. The skin had a morbid chill and dryness, and the cellular structure
of the tissue seemed exaggeratedly coarse and loosely knit. Even a large olive birthmark on the
right hip had disappeared, whilst there had formed on the chest a very peculiar mole or blackish
spot of which no trace existed before. In general, all physicians agree that in Ward the processes
of metabolism had become retarded to a degree beyond precedent.
Psychologically, too, Charles Ward was unique. His madness held no affinity to any
sort recorded in even the latest and most exhaustive of treatises, and was conjoined to a mental
force which would have made him a genius or a leader had it not been twisted into strange and
grotesque forms. Dr. Willett, who was Ward’s family physician, affirms that the
patient’s gross mental capacity, as gauged by his response to matters outside the sphere of
his insanity, had actually increased since the seizure. Ward, it is true, was always a scholar and
an antiquarian; but even his most brilliant early work did not shew the prodigious grasp and
insight displayed during his last examinations by the alienists. It was, indeed, a difficult matter
to obtain a legal commitment to the hospital, so powerful and lucid did the youth’s mind
seem; and only on the evidence of others, and on the strength of many abnormal gaps in his stock of
information as distinguished from his intelligence, was he finally placed in confinement. To the
very moment of his vanishment he was an omnivorous reader and as great a conversationalist as his
poor voice permitted; and shrewd observers, failing to foresee his escape, freely predicted that he
would not be long in gaining his discharge from custody.
Only Dr. Willett, who brought Charles Ward into the world and had watched his
growth of body and mind ever since, seemed frightened at the thought of his future freedom. He had
had a terrible experience and had made a terrible discovery which he dared not reveal to his
sceptical colleagues. Willett, indeed, presents a minor mystery all his own in his connexion with
the case. He was the last to see the patient before his flight, and emerged from that final
conversation in a state of mixed horror and relief which several recalled when Ward’s escape
became known three hours later. That escape itself is one of the unsolved wonders of Dr.
Waite’s hospital. A window open above a sheer drop of sixty feet could hardly explain it, yet
after that talk with Willett the youth was undeniably gone. Willett himself has no public
explanations to offer, though he seems strangely easier in mind than before the escape. Many,
indeed, feel that he would like to say more if he thought any considerable number would believe
him. He had found Ward in his room, but shortly after his departure the attendants knocked in vain.
When they opened the door the patient was not there, and all they found was the open window with a
chill April breeze blowing in a cloud of fine bluish-grey dust that almost choked them. True, the
dogs howled some time before; but that was while Willett was still present, and they had caught
nothing and shewn no disturbance later on. Ward’s father was told at once over the telephone,
but he seemed more saddened than surprised. By the time Dr. Waite called in person, Dr. Willett had
been talking with him, and both disavowed any knowledge or complicity in the escape. Only from
certain closely confidential friends of Willett and the senior Ward have any clues been gained, and
even these are too wildly fantastic for general credence. The one fact which remains is that up to
the present time no trace of the missing madman has been unearthed.
Charles Ward was an antiquarian from infancy, no doubt gaining his taste from the
venerable town around him, and from the relics of the past which filled every corner of his
parents’ old mansion in Prospect Street on the crest of the hill. With the years his devotion
to ancient things increased; so that history, genealogy, and the study of colonial architecture,
furniture, and craftsmanship at length crowded everything else from his sphere of interests. These
tastes are important to remember in considering his madness; for although they do not form its
absolute nucleus, they play a prominent part in its superficial form. The gaps of information which
the alienists noticed were all related to modern matters, and were invariably offset by a
correspondingly excessive though outwardly concealed knowledge of bygone matters as brought out by
adroit questioning; so that one would have fancied the patient literally transferred to a former
age through some obscure sort of auto-hypnosis. The odd thing was that Ward seemed no longer
interested in the antiquities he knew so well. He had, it appears, lost his regard for them through
sheer familiarity; and all his final efforts were obviously bent toward mastering those common
facts of the modern world which had been so totally and unmistakably expunged from his brain. That
this wholesale deletion had occurred, he did his best to hide; but it was clear to all who watched
him that his whole programme of reading and conversation was determined by a frantic wish to imbibe
such knowledge of his own life and of the ordinary practical and cultural background of the
twentieth century as ought to have been his by virtue of his birth in 1902 and his education in the
schools of our own time. Alienists are now wondering how, in view of his vitally impaired range of
data, the escaped patient manages to cope with the complicated world of today; the dominant opinion
being that he is ‘lying low’ in some humble and unexacting position till his stock of
modern information can be brought up to the normal.
The beginning of Ward’s madness is a matter of dispute among alienists. Dr.
Lyman, the eminent Boston authority, places it in 1919 or 1920, during the boy’s last year at
the Moses Brown School, when he suddenly turned from the study of the past to the study of the
occult, and refused to qualify for college on the ground that he had individual researches of much
greater importance to make. This is certainly borne out by Ward’s altered habits at the time,
especially by his continual search through town records and among old burying-grounds for a certain
grave dug in 1771; the grave of an ancestor named Joseph Curwen, some of whose papers he professed
to have found behind the panelling of a very old house in Olney Court, on Stampers’ Hill,
which Curwen was known to have built and occupied. It is, broadly speaking, undeniable that the
winter of 1919–20 saw a great change in Ward; whereby he abruptly stopped his general
antiquarian pursuits and embarked on a desperate delving into occult subjects both at home and
abroad, varied only by this strangely persistent search for his forefather’s grave.
From this opinion, however, Dr. Willett substantially dissents; basing his verdict
on his close and continuous knowledge of the patient, and on certain frightful investigations and
discoveries which he made toward the last. Those investigations and discoveries have left their
mark upon him; so that his voice trembles when he tells them, and his hand trembles when he tries
to write of them. Willett admits that the change of 1919–20 would ordinarily appear to mark
the beginning of a progressive decadence which culminated in the horrible and uncanny alienation of
1928; but believes from personal observation that a finer distinction must be made. Granting freely
that the boy was always ill-balanced temperamentally, and prone to be unduly susceptible and
enthusiastic in his responses to phenomena around him, he refuses to concede that the early
alteration marked the actual passage from sanity to madness; crediting instead Ward’s own
statement that he had discovered or rediscovered something whose effect on human thought was likely
to be marvellous and profound. The true madness, he is certain, came with a later change; after the
Curwen portrait and the ancient papers had been unearthed; after a trip to strange foreign places
had been made, and some terrible invocations chanted under strange and secret circumstances; after
certain answers to these invocations had been plainly indicated, and a frantic letter penned
under agonising and inexplicable conditions; after the wave of vampirism and the ominous Pawtuxet
gossip; and after the patient’s memory commenced to exclude contemporary images whilst his
voice failed and his physical aspect underwent the subtle modification so many subsequently
noticed.
It was only about this time, Willett points out with much acuteness, that the
nightmare qualities became indubitably linked with Ward; and the doctor feels shudderingly sure
that enough solid evidence exists to sustain the youth’s claim regarding his crucial
discovery. In the first place, two workmen of high intelligence saw Joseph Curwen’s ancient
papers found. Secondly, the boy once shewed Dr. Willett those papers and a page of the Curwen
diary, and each of the documents had every appearance of genuineness. The hole where Ward claimed
to have found them was long a visible reality, and Willett had a very convincing final glimpse of
them in surroundings which can scarcely be believed and can never perhaps be proved. Then there
were the mysteries and coincidences of the Orne and Hutchinson letters, and the problem of the
Curwen penmanship and of what the detectives brought to light about Dr. Allen; these things, and
the terrible message in mediaeval minuscules found in Willett’s pocket when he gained
consciousness after his shocking experience.
And most conclusive of all, there are the two hideous results which the
doctor obtained from a certain pair of formulae during his final investigations; results which
virtually proved the authenticity of the papers and of their monstrous implications at the same
time that those papers were borne forever from human knowledge.
2.
One must look back at Charles Ward’s earlier life as at something belonging
as much to the past as the antiquities he loved so keenly. In the autumn of 1918, and with a
considerable show of zest in the military training of the period, he had begun his junior year at
the Moses Brown School, which lies very near his home. The old main building, erected in 1819, had
always charmed his youthful antiquarian sense; and the spacious park in which the academy is set
appealed to his sharp eye for landscape. His social activities were few; and his hours were spent
mainly at home, in rambling walks, in his classes and drills, and in pursuit of antiquarian and
genealogical data at the City Hall, the State House, the Public Library, the Athenaeum, the
Historical Society, the John Carter Brown and John Hay Libraries of Brown University, and the newly
opened Shepley Library in Benefit Street. One may picture him yet as he was in those days; tall,
slim, and blond, with studious eyes and a slight stoop, dressed somewhat carelessly, and giving a
dominant impression of harmless awkwardness rather than attractiveness.
His walks were always adventures in antiquity, during which he managed to
recapture from the myriad relics of a glamorous old city a vivid and connected picture of the
centuries before. His home was a great Georgian mansion atop the well-nigh precipitous hill that
rises just east of the river; and from the rear windows of its rambling wings he could look dizzily
out over all the clustered spires, domes, roofs, and skyscraper summits of the lower town to the
purple hills of the countryside beyond. Here he was born, and from the lovely classic porch of the
double-bayed brick facade his nurse had first wheeled him in his carriage; past the little white
farmhouse of two hundred years before that the town had long ago overtaken, and on toward the
stately colleges along the shady, sumptuous street, whose old square brick mansions and smaller
wooden houses with narrow, heavy-columned Doric porches dreamed solid and exclusive amidst their
generous yards and gardens.
He had been wheeled, too, along sleepy Congdon Street, one tier lower down on the
steep hill, and with all its eastern homes on high terraces. The small wooden houses averaged a
greater age here, for it was up this hill that the growing town had climbed; and in these rides he
had imbibed something of the colour of a quaint colonial village. The nurse used to stop and sit on
the benches of Prospect Terrace to chat with policemen; and one of the child’s first memories
was of the great westward sea of hazy roofs and domes and steeples and far hills which he saw one
winter afternoon from that great railed embankment, all violet and mystic against a fevered,
apocalyptic sunset of reds and golds and purples and curious greens. The vast marble dome of the
State House stood out in massive silhouette, its crowning statue haloed fantastically by a break in
one of the tinted stratus clouds that barred the flaming sky.
When he was larger his famous walks began; first with his impatiently dragged
nurse, and then alone in dreamy meditation. Farther and farther down that almost perpendicular hill
he would venture, each time reaching older and quainter levels of the ancient city. He would
hesitate gingerly down vertical Jenckes Street with its bank walls and colonial gables to the shady
Benefit Street corner, where before him was a wooden antique with an Ionic-pilastered pair of
doorways, and beside him a prehistoric gambrel-roofer with a bit of primal farmyard remaining, and
the great Judge Durfee house with its fallen vestiges of Georgian grandeur. It was getting to be a
slum here; but the titan elms cast a restoring shadow over the place, and the boy used to stroll
south past the long lines of the pre-Revolutionary homes with their great central chimneys and
classic portals. On the eastern side they were set high over basements with railed double flights
of stone steps, and the young Charles could picture them as they were when the street was new, and
red heels and periwigs set off the painted pediments whose signs of wear were now becoming so
visible.
Westward the hill dropped almost as steeply as above, down to the old “Town
Street” that the founders had laid out at the river’s edge in 1636. Here ran
innumerable little lanes with leaning, huddled houses of immense antiquity; and fascinated though
he was, it was long before he dared to thread their archaic verticality for fear they would turn
out a dream or a gateway to unknown terrors. He found it much less formidable to continue along
Benefit Street past the iron fence of St. John’s hidden churchyard and the rear of the 1761
Colony House and the mouldering bulk of the Golden Ball Inn where Washington stopped. At Meeting
Street—the successive Gaol Lane and King Street of other periods—he would look upward
to the east and see the arched flight of steps to which the highway had to resort in climbing the
slope, and downward to the west, glimpsing the old brick colonial schoolhouse that smiles across
the road at the ancient Sign of Shakespear’s Head where the Providence Gazette and
Country-Journal was printed before the Revolution. Then came the exquisite First Baptist Church
of 1775, luxurious with its matchless Gibbs steeple, and the Georgian roofs and cupolas hovering
by. Here and to the southward the neighbourhood became better, flowering at last into a marvellous
group of early mansions; but still the little ancient lanes led off down the precipice to the west,
spectral in their many-gabled archaism and dipping to a riot of iridescent decay where the wicked
old waterfront recalls its proud East India days amidst polyglot vice and squalor, rotting wharves,
and blear-eyed ship-chandleries, with such surviving alley names as Packet, Bullion, Gold, Silver,
Coin, Doubloon, Sovereign, Guilder, Dollar, Dime, and Cent.
Sometimes, as he grew taller and more adventurous, young Ward would venture down
into this maelstrom of tottering houses, broken transoms, tumbling steps, twisted balustrades,
swarthy faces, and nameless odours; winding from South Main to South Water, searching out the docks
where the bay and sound steamers still touched, and returning northward at this lower level past
the steep-roofed 1816 warehouses and the broad square at the Great Bridge, where the 1773 Market
House still stands firm on its ancient arches. In that square he would pause to drink in the
bewildering beauty of the old town as it rises on its eastward bluff, decked with its two Georgian
spires and crowned by the vast new Christian Science dome as London is crowned by St. Paul’s.
He liked mostly to reach this point in the late afternoon, when the slanting sunlight touches the
Market House and the ancient hill roofs and belfries with gold, and throws magic around the
dreaming wharves where Providence Indiamen used to ride at anchor. After a long look he would grow
almost dizzy with a poet’s love for the sight, and then he would scale the slope homeward in
the dusk past the old white church and up the narrow precipitous ways where yellow gleams would
begin to peep out in small-paned windows and through fanlights set high over double flights of
steps with curious wrought-iron railings.
At other times, and in later years, he would seek for vivid contrasts; spending
half a walk in the crumbling colonial regions northwest of his home, where the hill drops to the
lower eminence of Stampers’ Hill with its ghetto and negro quarter clustering round the place
where the Boston stage coach used to start before the Revolution, and the other half in the
gracious southerly realm about George, Benevolent, Power, and Williams Streets, where the old slope
holds unchanged the fine estates and bits of walled garden and steep green lane in which so many
fragrant memories linger. These rambles, together with the diligent studies which accompanied them,
certainly account for a large amount of the antiquarian lore which at last crowded the modern world
from Charles Ward’s mind; and illustrate the mental soil upon which fell, in that fateful
winter of 1919–20, the seeds that came to such strange and terrible fruition.
Dr. Willett is certain that, up to this ill-omened winter of first change, Charles
Ward’s antiquarianism was free from every trace of the morbid. Graveyards held for him no
particular attraction beyond their quaintness and historic value, and of anything like violence or
savage instinct he was utterly devoid. Then, by insidious degrees, there appeared to develop a
curious sequel to one of his genealogical triumphs of the year before; when he had discovered among
his maternal ancestors a certain very long-lived man named Joseph Curwen, who had come from Salem
in March of 1692, and about whom a whispered series of highly peculiar and disquieting stories
clustered.
Ward’s great-great-grandfather Welcome Potter had in 1785 married a certain
“Ann Tillinghast, daughter of Mrs. Eliza, daughter to Capt. James Tillinghast”, of
whose paternity the family had preserved no trace. Late in 1918, whilst examining a volume of
original town records in manuscript, the young genealogist encountered an entry describing a legal
change of name, by which in 1772 a Mrs. Eliza Curwen, widow of Joseph Curwen, resumed, along with
her seven-year-old daughter Ann, her maiden name of Tillinghast; on the ground ‘that her
Husband’s name was become a publick Reproach by Reason of what was knowne after his Decease;
the which confirming an antient common Rumour, tho’ not to be credited by a loyall Wife till
so proven as to be wholely past Doubting’. This entry came to light upon the accidental
separation of two leaves which had been carefully pasted together and treated as one by a laboured
revision of the page numbers.
It was at once clear to Charles Ward that he had indeed discovered a hitherto
unknown great-great-great-grandfather. The discovery doubly excited him because he had already
heard vague reports and seen scattered allusions relating to this person; about whom there remained
so few publicly available records, aside from those becoming public only in modern times, that it
almost seemed as if a conspiracy had existed to blot him from memory. What did appear, moreover,
was of such a singular and provocative nature that one could not fail to imagine curiously what it
was that the colonial recorders were so anxious to conceal and forget; or to suspect that the
deletion had reasons all too valid.
Before this, Ward had been content to let his romancing about old Joseph Curwen
remain in the idle stage; but having discovered his own relationship to this apparently
“hushed-up” character, he proceeded to hunt out as systematically as possible whatever
he might find concerning him. In this excited quest he eventually succeeded beyond his highest
expectations; for old letters, diaries, and sheaves of unpublished memoirs in cobwebbed Providence
garrets and elsewhere yielded many illuminating passages which their writers had not thought it
worth their while to destroy. One important sidelight came from a point as remote as New York,
where some Rhode Island colonial correspondence was stored in the Museum at Fraunces’ Tavern.
The really crucial thing, though, and what in Dr. Willett’s opinion formed the definite
source of Ward’s undoing, was the matter found in August 1919 behind the panelling of the
crumbling house in Olney Court. It was that, beyond a doubt, which opened up those black vistas
whose end was deeper than the pit.
II. An Antecedent and a Horror1.

Joseph Curwen, as revealed by the rambling legends embodied in what Ward heard and unearthed, was a
very astonishing, enigmatic, and obscurely horrible individual. He had fled from Salem to
Providence—that universal haven of the odd, the free, and the dissenting—at the
beginning of the great witchcraft panic; being in fear of accusation because of his solitary ways
and queer chemical or alchemical experiments. He was a colourless-looking man of about thirty, and
was soon found qualified to become a freeman of Providence; thereafter buying a home lot just north
of Gregory Dexter’s at about the foot of Olney Street. His house was built on Stampers’
Hill west of the Town Street, in what later became Olney Court; and in 1761 he replaced this with a
larger one, on the same site, which is still standing.
Now the first odd thing about Joseph Curwen was that he did not seem to grow much
older than he had been on his arrival. He engaged in shipping enterprises, purchased wharfage near
Mile-End Cove, helped rebuild the Great Bridge in 1713, and in 1723 was one of the founders of the
Congregational Church on the hill; but always did he retain the nondescript aspect of a man not
greatly over thirty or thirty-five. As decades mounted up, this singular quality began to excite
wide notice; but Curwen always explained it by saying that he came of hardy forefathers, and
practiced a simplicity of living which did not wear him out. How such simplicity could be
reconciled with the inexplicable comings and goings of the secretive merchant, and with the queer
gleaming of his windows at all hours of night, was not very clear to the townsfolk; and they were
prone to assign other reasons for his continued youth and longevity. It was held, for the most
part, that Curwen’s incessant mixings and boilings of chemicals had much to do with his
condition. Gossip spoke of the strange substances he brought from London and the Indies on his
ships or purchased in Newport, Boston, and New York; and when old Dr. Jabez Bowen came from
Rehoboth and opened his apothecary shop across the Great Bridge at the Sign of the Unicorn and
Mortar, there was ceaseless talk of the drugs, acids, and metals that the taciturn recluse
incessantly bought or ordered from him. Acting on the assumption that Curwen possessed a wondrous
and secret medical skill, many sufferers of various sorts applied to him for aid; but though he
appeared to encourage their belief in a non-committal way, and always gave them odd-coloured
potions in response to their requests, it was observed that his ministrations to others seldom
proved of benefit. At length, when over fifty years had passed since the stranger’s advent,
and without producing more than five years’ apparent change in his face and physique, the
people began to whisper more darkly; and to meet more than half way that desire for isolation which
he had always shewn.
Private letters and diaries of the period reveal, too, a multitude of other
reasons why Joseph Curwen was marvelled at, feared, and finally shunned like a plague. His passion
for graveyards, in which he was glimpsed at all hours and under all conditions, was notorious;
though no one had witnessed any deed on his part which could actually be termed ghoulish. On the
Pawtuxet Road he had a farm, at which he generally lived during the summer, and to which he would
frequently be seen riding at various odd times of the day or night. Here his only visible servants,
farmers, and caretakers were a sullen pair of aged Narragansett Indians; the husband dumb and
curiously scarred, and the wife of a very repulsive cast of countenance, probably due to a mixture
of negro blood. In the lean-to of this house was the laboratory where most of the chemical
experiments were conducted. Curious porters and teamers who delivered bottles, bags, or boxes at
the small rear door would exchange accounts of the fantastic flasks, crucibles, alembics, and
furnaces they saw in the low shelved room; and prophesied in whispers that the close-mouthed
“chymist”—by which they meant alchemist—would not be long in finding
the Philosopher’s Stone. The nearest neighbours to this farm—the Fenners, a quarter of
a mile away—had still queerer things to tell of certain sounds which they insisted came from
the Curwen place in the night. There were cries, they said, and sustained howlings; and they did
not like the large number of livestock which thronged the pastures, for no such amount was needed
to keep a lone old man and a very few servants in meat, milk, and wool. The identity of the stock
seemed to change from week to week as new droves were purchased from the Kingstown farmers. Then,
too, there was something very obnoxious about a certain great stone outbuilding with only high
narrow slits for windows.
Great Bridge idlers likewise had much to say of Curwen’s town house in Olney
Court; not so much the fine new one built in 1761, when the man must have been nearly a century
old, but the first low gambrel-roofed one with the windowless attic and shingled sides, whose
timbers he took the peculiar precaution of burning after its demolition. Here there was less
mystery, it is true; but the hours at which lights were seen, the secretiveness of the two swarthy
foreigners who comprised the only menservants, the hideous indistinct mumbling of the incredibly
aged French housekeeper, the large amounts of food seen to enter a door within which only four
persons lived, and the quality of certain voices often heard in muffled conversation at
highly unseasonable times, all combined with what was known of the Pawtuxet farm to give the place
a bad name.
In choicer circles, too, the Curwen home was by no means undiscussed; for as the
newcomer had gradually worked into the church and trading life of the town, he had naturally made
acquaintances of the better sort, whose company and conversation he was well fitted by education to
enjoy. His birth was known to be good, since the Curwens or Corwins of Salem needed no introduction
in New England. It developed that Joseph Curwen had travelled much in very early life, living for a
time in England and making at least two voyages to the Orient; and his speech, when he deigned to
use it, was that of a learned and cultivated Englishman. But for some reason or other Curwen did
not care for society. Whilst never actually rebuffing a visitor, he always reared such a wall of
reserve that few could think of anything to say to him which would not sound inane.
There seemed to lurk in his bearing some cryptic, sardonic arrogance, as if he had
come to find all human beings dull through having moved among stranger and more potent entities.
When Dr. Checkley the famous wit came from Boston in 1738 to be rector of King’s Church, he
did not neglect calling on one of whom he soon heard so much; but left in a very short while
because of some sinister undercurrent he detected in his host’s discourse. Charles Ward told
his father, when they discussed Curwen one winter evening, that he would give much to learn what
the mysterious old man had said to the sprightly cleric, but that all diarists agree concerning Dr.
Checkley’s reluctance to repeat anything he had heard. The good man had been hideously
shocked, and could never recall Joseph Curwen without a visible loss of the gay urbanity for which
he was famed.
More definite, however, was the reason why another man of taste and breeding
avoided the haughty hermit. In 1746 Mr. John Merritt, an elderly English gentleman of literary and
scientific leanings, came from Newport to the town which was so rapidly overtaking it in standing,
and built a fine country seat on the Neck in what is now the heart of the best residence section.
He lived in considerable style and comfort, keeping the first coach and liveried servants in town,
and taking great pride in his telescope, his microscope, and his well-chosen library of English and
Latin books. Hearing of Curwen as the owner of the best library in Providence, Mr. Merritt early
paid him a call, and was more cordially received than most other callers at the house had been. His
admiration for his host’s ample shelves, which besides the Greek, Latin, and English classics
were equipped with a remarkable battery of philosophical, mathematical, and scientific works
including Paracelsus, Agricola, Van Helmont, Sylvius, Glauber, Boyle, Boerhaave, Becher, and Stahl,
led Curwen to suggest a visit to the farmhouse and laboratory whither he had never invited anyone
before; and the two drove out at once in Mr. Merritt’s coach.
Mr. Merritt always confessed to seeing nothing really horrible at the farmhouse,
but maintained that the titles of the books in the special library of thaumaturgical, alchemical,
and theological subjects which Curwen kept in a front room were alone sufficient to inspire him
with a lasting loathing. Perhaps, however, the facial expression of the owner in exhibiting them
contributed much of the prejudice. The bizarre collection, besides a host of standard works which
Mr. Merritt was not too alarmed to envy, embraced nearly all the cabbalists, daemonologists, and
magicians known to man; and was a treasure-house of lore in the doubtful realms of alchemy and
astrology. Hermes Trismegistus in Mesnard’s edition, the Turba Philosophorum,
Geber’s Liber Investigationis, and Artephius’ Key of Wisdom all were
there; with the cabbalistic Zohar, Peter Jammy’s set of Albertus Magnus, Raymond
Lully’s Ars Magna et Ultima in Zetzner’s edition, Roger Bacon’s
Thesaurus Chemicus, Fludd’s Clavis Alchimiae, and Trithemius’ De
Lapide Philosophico crowding them close. Mediaeval Jews and Arabs were represented in
profusion, and Mr. Merritt turned pale when, upon taking down a fine volume conspicuously labelled
as the Qanoon-e-Islam, he found it was in truth the forbidden Necronomicon of the mad
Arab Abdul Alhazred, of which he had heard such monstrous things whispered some years previously
after the exposure of nameless rites at the strange little fishing village of Kingsport, in the
Province of the Massachusetts-Bay.
But oddly enough, the worthy gentleman owned himself most impalpably disquieted by
a mere minor detail. On the huge mahogany table there lay face downward a badly worn copy of
Borellus, bearing many cryptical marginalia and interlineations in Curwen’s hand. The book
was open at about its middle, and one paragraph displayed such thick and tremulous pen-strokes
beneath the lines of mystic black-letter that the visitor could not resist scanning it through.
Whether it was the nature of the passage underscored, or the feverish heaviness of the strokes
which formed the underscoring, he could not tell; but something in that combination affected him
very badly and very peculiarly. He recalled it to the end of his days, writing it down from memory
in his diary and once trying to recite it to his close friend Dr. Checkley till he saw how greatly
it disturbed the urbane rector. It read:
“The essential Saltes of Animals may be so prepared and
preserved, that an ingenious Man may have the whole Ark of Noah in his own Studie, and raise the
fine Shape of an Animal out of its Ashes at his Pleasure; and by the lyke Method from the essential
Saltes of humane Dust, a Philosopher may, without any criminal Necromancy, call up the Shape of any
dead Ancestour from the Dust whereinto his Bodie has been incinerated.”
It was near the docks along the southerly part of the Town Street, however, that
the worst things were muttered about Joseph Curwen. Sailors are superstitious folk; and the
seasoned salts who manned the infinite rum, slave, and molasses sloops, the rakish privateers, and
the great brigs of the Browns, Crawfords, and Tillinghasts, all made strange furtive signs of
protection when they saw the slim, deceptively young-looking figure with its yellow hair and slight
stoop entering the Curwen warehouse in Doubloon Street or talking with captains and supercargoes on
the long quay where the Curwen ships rode restlessly. Curwen’s own clerks and captains hated
and feared him, and all his sailors were mongrel riff-raff from Martinique, St. Eustatius, Havana,
or Port Royal. It was, in a way, the frequency with which these sailors were replaced which
inspired the acutest and most tangible part of the fear in which the old man was held. A crew would
be turned loose in the town on shore leave, some of its members perhaps charged with this errand or
that; and when reassembled it would be almost sure to lack one or more men. That many of the
errands had concerned the farm on the Pawtuxet Road, and that few of the sailors had ever been seen
to return from that place, was not forgotten; so that in time it became exceedingly difficult for
Curwen to keep his oddly assorted hands. Almost invariably several would desert soon after hearing
the gossip of the Providence wharves, and their replacement in the West Indies became an
increasingly great problem to the merchant.
In 1760 Joseph Curwen was virtually an outcast, suspected of vague horrors and
daemoniac alliances which seemed all the more menacing because they could not be named, understood,
or even proved to exist. The last straw may have come from the affair of the missing soldiers in
1758, for in March and April of that year two Royal regiments on their way to New France were
quartered in Providence, and depleted by an inexplicable process far beyond the average rate of
desertion. Rumour dwelt on the frequency with which Curwen was wont to be seen talking with the
red-coated strangers; and as several of them began to be missed, people thought of the odd
conditions among his own seamen. What would have happened if the regiments had not been ordered on,
no one can tell.
Meanwhile the merchant’s worldly affairs were prospering. He had a virtual
monopoly of the town’s trade in saltpetre, black pepper, and cinnamon, and easily led any
other one shipping establishment save the Browns in his importation of brassware, indigo, cotton,
woollens, salt, rigging, iron, paper, and English goods of every kind. Such shopkeepers as James
Green, at the Sign of the Elephant in Cheapside, the Russells, at the Sign of the Golden Eagle
across the Bridge, or Clark and Nightingale at the Frying-Pan and Fish near the New Coffee-House,
depended almost wholly upon him for their stock; and his arrangements with the local distillers,
the Narragansett dairymen and horse-breeders, and the Newport candle-makers, made him one of the
prime exporters of the Colony.
Ostracised though he was, he did not lack for civic spirit of a sort. When the
Colony House burned down, he subscribed handsomely to the lotteries by which the new brick
one—still standing at the head of its parade in the old main street—was built in 1761.
In that same year, too, he helped rebuild the Great Bridge after the October gale. He replaced many
of the books of the public library consumed in the Colony House fire, and bought heavily in the
lottery that gave the muddy Market Parade and deep-rutted Town Street their pavement of great round
stones with a brick footwalk or “causey” in the middle. About this time, also, he built
the plain but excellent new house whose doorway is still such a triumph of carving. When the
Whitefield adherents broke off from Dr. Cotton’s hill church in 1743 and founded Deacon
Snow’s church across the Bridge, Curwen had gone with them; though his zeal and attendance
soon abated. Now, however, he cultivated piety once more; as if to dispel the shadow which had
thrown him into isolation and would soon begin to wreck his business fortunes if not sharply
checked.
2.
The sight of this strange, pallid man, hardly middle-aged in aspect yet certainly
not less than a full century old, seeking at last to emerge from a cloud of fright and detestation
too vague to pin down or analyse, was at once a pathetic, a dramatic, and a contemptible thing.
Such is the power of wealth and of surface gestures, however, that there came indeed a slight
abatement in the visible aversion displayed toward him; especially after the rapid disappearances
of his sailors abruptly ceased. He must likewise have begun to practice an extreme care and secrecy
in his graveyard expeditions, for he was never again caught at such wanderings; whilst the rumours
of uncanny sounds and manoeuvres at his Pawtuxet farm diminished in proportion. His rate of food
consumption and cattle replacement remained abnormally high; but not until modern times, when
Charles Ward examined a set of his accounts and invoices in the Shepley Library, did it occur to
any person—save one embittered youth, perhaps—to make dark comparisons between the
large number of Guinea blacks he imported until 1766, and the disturbingly small number for whom he
could produce bona fide bills of sale either to slave-dealers at the Great Bridge or to the
planters of the Narragansett Country. Certainly, the cunning and ingenuity of this abhorred
character were uncannily profound, once the necessity for their exercise had become impressed upon
him.
But of course the effect of all this belated mending was necessarily slight.
Curwen continued to be avoided and distrusted, as indeed the one fact of his continued air of youth
at a great age would have been enough to warrant; and he could see that in the end his fortunes
would be likely to suffer. His elaborate studies and experiments, whatever they may have been,
apparently required a heavy income for their maintenance; and since a change of environment would
deprive him of the trading advantages he had gained, it would not have profited him to begin anew
in a different region just then. Judgment demanded that he patch up his relations with the
townsfolk of Providence, so that his presence might no longer be a signal for hushed conversation,
transparent excuses of errands elsewhere, and a general atmosphere of constraint and uneasiness.
His clerks, being now reduced to the shiftless and impecunious residue whom no one else would
employ, were giving him much worry; and he held to his sea-captains and mates only by shrewdness in
gaining some kind of ascendancy over them—a mortgage, a promissory note, or a bit of
information very pertinent to their welfare. In many cases, diarists have recorded with some awe,
Curwen shewed almost the power of a wizard in unearthing family secrets for questionable use.
During the final five years of his life it seemed as though only direct talks with the long-dead
could possibly have furnished some of the data which he had so glibly at his tongue’s
end.
About this time the crafty scholar hit upon a last desperate expedient to regain
his footing in the community. Hitherto a complete hermit, he now determined to contract an
advantageous marriage; securing as a bride some lady whose unquestioned position would make all
ostracism of his home impossible. It may be that he also had deeper reasons for wishing an
alliance; reasons so far outside the known cosmic sphere that only papers found a century and a
half after his death caused anyone to suspect them; but of this nothing certain can ever be
learned. Naturally he was aware of the horror and indignation with which any ordinary courtship of
his would be received, hence he looked about for some likely candidate upon whose parents he might
exert a suitable pressure. Such candidates, he found, were not at all easy to discover; since he
had very particular requirements in the way of beauty, accomplishments, and social security. At
length his survey narrowed down to the household of one of his best and oldest ship-captains, a
widower of high birth and unblemished standing named Dutee Tillinghast, whose only daughter Eliza
seemed dowered with every conceivable advantage save prospects as an heiress. Capt. Tillinghast was
completely under the domination of Curwen; and consented, after a terrible interview in his
cupolaed house on Power’s Lane hill, to sanction the blasphemous alliance.
Eliza Tillinghast was at that time eighteen years of age, and had been reared as
gently as the reduced circumstances of her father permitted. She had attended Stephen
Jackson’s school opposite the Court-House Parade; and had been diligently instructed by her
mother, before the latter’s death of smallpox in 1757, in all the arts and refinements of
domestic life. A sampler of hers, worked in 1753 at the age of nine, may still be found in the
rooms of the Rhode Island Historical Society. After her mother’s death she had kept the
house, aided only by one old black woman. Her arguments with her father concerning the proposed
Curwen marriage must have been painful indeed; but of these we have no record. Certain it is that
her engagement to young Ezra Weeden, second mate of the Crawford packet Enterprise, was
dutifully broken off, and that her union with Joseph Curwen took place on the seventh of March,
1763, in the Baptist church, in the presence of one of the most distinguished assemblages which the
town could boast; the ceremony being performed by the younger Samuel Winsor. The Gazette
mentioned the event very briefly, and in most surviving copies the item in question seems to be cut
or torn out. Ward found a single intact copy after much search in the archives of a private
collector of note, observing with amusement the meaningless urbanity of the language:
“Monday evening last, Mr. Joseph Curwen, of this Town, Merchant,
was married to Miss Eliza Tillinghast, Daughter of Capt. Dutee Tillinghast, a young Lady who has
real Merit, added to a beautiful Person, to grace the connubial State and perpetuate its
Felicity.”
The collection of Durfee-Arnold letters, discovered by Charles Ward shortly before
his first reputed madness in the private collection of Melville F. Peters, Esq., of George St., and
covering this and a somewhat antecedent period, throws vivid light on the outrage done to public
sentiment by this ill-assorted match. The social influence of the Tillinghasts, however, was not to
be denied; and once more Joseph Curwen found his house frequented by persons whom he could never
otherwise have induced to cross his threshold. His acceptance was by no means complete, and his
bride was socially the sufferer through her forced venture; but at all events the wall of utter
ostracism was somewhat worn down. In his treatment of his wife the strange bridegroom astonished
both her and the community by displaying an extreme graciousness and consideration. The new house
in Olney Court was now wholly free from disturbing manifestations, and although Curwen was much
absent at the Pawtuxet farm which his wife never visited, he seemed more like a normal citizen than
at any other time in his long years of residence. Only one person remained in open enmity with him,
this being the youthful ship’s officer whose engagement to Eliza Tillinghast had been so
abruptly broken. Ezra Weeden had frankly vowed vengeance; and though of a quiet and ordinarily mild
disposition, was now gaining a hate-bred, dogged purpose which boded no good to the usurping
husband.
On the seventh of May, 1765, Curwen’s only child Ann was born; and was
christened by the Rev. John Graves of King’s Church, of which both husband and wife had
become communicants shortly after their marriage, in order to compromise between their respective
Congregational and Baptist affiliations. The record of this birth, as well as that of the marriage
two years before, was stricken from most copies of the church and town annals where it ought to
appear; and Charles Ward located both with the greatest difficulty after his discovery of the
widow’s change of name had apprised him of his own relationship, and engendered the feverish
interest which culminated in his madness. The birth entry, indeed, was found very curiously through
correspondence with the heirs of the loyalist Dr. Graves, who had taken with him a duplicate set of
records when he left his pastorate at the outbreak of the Revolution. Ward had tried this source
because he knew that his great-great-grandmother Ann Tillinghast Potter had been an
Episcopalian.
Shortly after the birth of his daughter, an event he seemed to welcome with a
fervour greatly out of keeping with his usual coldness, Curwen resolved to sit for a portrait. This
he had painted by a very gifted Scotsman named Cosmo Alexander, then a resident of Newport, and
since famous as the early teacher of Gilbert Stuart. The likeness was said to have been executed on
a wall-panel of the library of the house in Olney Court, but neither of the two old diaries
mentioning it gave any hint of its ultimate disposition. At this period the erratic scholar shewed
signs of unusual abstraction, and spent as much time as he possibly could at his farm on the
Pawtuxet Road. He seemed, it was stated, in a condition of suppressed excitement or suspense; as if
expecting some phenomenal thing or on the brink of some strange discovery. Chemistry or alchemy
would appear to have played a great part, for he took from his house to the farm the greater number
of his volumes on that subject.
His affectation of civic interest did not diminish, and he lost no opportunities
for helping such leaders as Stephen Hopkins, Joseph Brown, and Benjamin West in their efforts to
raise the cultural tone of the town, which was then much below the level of Newport in its
patronage of the liberal arts. He had helped Daniel Jenckes found his bookshop in 1763, and was
thereafter his best customer; extending aid likewise to the struggling Gazette that appeared
each Wednesday at the Sign of Shakespear’s Head. In politics he ardently supported Governor
Hopkins against the Ward party whose prime strength was in Newport, and his really eloquent speech
at Hacker’s Hall in 1765 against the setting off of North Providence as a separate town with
a pro-Ward vote in the General Assembly did more than any other one thing to wear down the
prejudice against him. But Ezra Weeden, who watched him closely, sneered cynically at all this
outward activity; and freely swore it was no more than a mask for some nameless traffick with the
blackest gulfs of Tartarus. The revengeful youth began a systematic study of the man and his doings
whenever he was in port; spending hours at night by the wharves with a dory in readiness when he
saw lights in the Curwen warehouses, and following the small boat which would sometimes steal
quietly off and down the bay. He also kept as close a watch as possible on the Pawtuxet farm, and
was once severely bitten by the dogs the old Indian couple loosed upon him.
3.
In 1766 came the final change in Joseph Curwen. It was very sudden, and gained
wide notice amongst the curious townsfolk; for the air of suspense and expectancy dropped like an
old cloak, giving instant place to an ill-concealed exaltation of perfect triumph. Curwen seemed to
have difficulty in restraining himself from public harangues on what he had found or learned or
made; but apparently the need of secrecy was greater than the longing to share his rejoicing, for
no explanation was ever offered by him. It was after this transition, which appears to have come
early in July, that the sinister scholar began to astonish people by his possession of information
which only their long-dead ancestors would seem to be able to impart.
But Curwen’s feverish secret activities by no means ceased with this change.
On the contrary, they tended rather to increase; so that more and more of his shipping business was
handled by the captains whom he now bound to him by ties of fear as potent as those of bankruptcy
had been. He altogether abandoned the slave trade, alleging that its profits were constantly
decreasing. Every possible moment was spent at the Pawtuxet farm; though there were rumours now and
then of his presence in places which, though not actually near graveyards, were yet so situated in
relation to graveyards that thoughtful people wondered just how thorough the old merchant’s
change of habits really was. Ezra Weeden, though his periods of espionage were necessarily brief
and intermittent on account of his sea voyaging, had a vindictive persistence which the bulk of the
practical townsfolk and farmers lacked; and subjected Curwen’s affairs to a scrutiny such as
they had never had before.
Many of the odd manoeuvres of the strange merchant’s vessels had been taken
for granted on account of the unrest of the times, when every colonist seemed determined to resist
the provisions of the Sugar Act which hampered a prominent traffick. Smuggling and evasion were the
rule in Narragansett Bay, and nocturnal landings of illicit cargoes were continuous commonplaces.
But Weeden, night after night following the lighters or small sloops which he saw steal off from
the Curwen warehouses at the Town Street docks, soon felt assured that it was not merely His
Majesty’s armed ships which the sinister skulker was anxious to avoid. Prior to the change in
1766 these boats had for the most part contained chained negroes, who were carried down and across
the bay and landed at an obscure point on the shore just north of Pawtuxet; being afterward driven
up the bluff and across country to the Curwen farm, where they were locked in that enormous stone
outbuilding which had only high narrow slits for windows. After that change, however, the whole
programme was altered. Importation of slaves ceased at once, and for a time Curwen abandoned his
midnight sailings. Then, about the spring of 1767, a new policy appeared. Once more the lighters
grew wont to put out from the black, silent docks, and this time they would go down the bay some
distance, perhaps as far as Namquit Point, where they would meet and receive cargo from strange
ships of considerable size and widely varied appearance. Curwen’s sailors would then deposit
this cargo at the usual point on the shore, and transport it overland to the farm; locking it in
the same cryptical stone building which had formerly received the negroes. The cargo consisted
almost wholly of boxes and cases, of which a large proportion were oblong and heavy and
disturbingly suggestive of coffins.
Weeden always watched the farm with unremitting assiduity; visiting it each night
for long periods, and seldom letting a week go by without a sight except when the ground bore a
footprint-revealing snow. Even then he would often walk as close as possible in the travelled road
or on the ice of the neighbouring river to see what tracks others might have left. Finding his own
vigils interrupted by nautical duties, he hired a tavern companion named Eleazar Smith to continue
the survey during his absences; and between them the two could have set in motion some
extraordinary rumours. That they did not do so was only because they knew the effect of publicity
would be to warn their quarry and make further progress impossible. Instead, they wished to learn
something definite before taking any action. What they did learn must have been startling indeed,
and Charles Ward spoke many times to his parents of his regret at Weeden’s later burning of
his notebooks. All that can be told of their discoveries is what Eleazar Smith jotted down in a
none too coherent diary, and what other diarists and letter-writers have timidly repeated from the
statements which they finally made—and according to which the farm was only the outer shell
of some vast and revolting menace, of a scope and depth too profound and intangible for more than
shadowy comprehension.
It is gathered that Weeden and Smith became early convinced that a great series of
tunnels and catacombs, inhabited by a very sizeable staff of persons besides the old Indian and his
wife, underlay the farm. The house was an old peaked relic of the middle seventeenth century with
enormous stack chimney and diamond-paned lattice windows, the laboratory being in a lean-to toward
the north, where the roof came nearly to the ground. This building stood clear of any other; yet
judging by the different voices heard at odd times within, it must have been accessible through
secret passages beneath. These voices, before 1766, were mere mumblings and negro whisperings and
frenzied screams, coupled with curious chants or invocations. After that date, however, they
assumed a very singular and terrible cast as they ran the gamut betwixt dronings of dull
acquiescence and explosions of frantic pain or fury, rumblings of conversation and whines of
entreaty, pantings of eagerness and shouts of protest. They appeared to be in different languages,
all known to Curwen, whose rasping accents were frequently distinguishable in reply, reproof, or
threatening. Sometimes it seemed that several persons must be in the house; Curwen, certain
captives, and the guards of those captives. There were voices of a sort that neither Weeden nor
Smith had ever heard before despite their wide knowledge of foreign parts, and many that they did
seem to place as belonging to this or that nationality. The nature of the conversations seemed
always a kind of catechism, as if Curwen were extorting some sort of information from terrified or
rebellious prisoners.
Weeden had many verbatim reports of overheard scraps in his notebook, for English,
French, and Spanish, which he knew, were frequently used; but of these nothing has survived. He
did, however, say that besides a few ghoulish dialogues in which the past affairs of Providence
families were concerned, most of the questions and answers he could understand were historical or
scientific; occasionally pertaining to very remote places and ages. Once, for example, an
alternately raging and sullen figure was questioned in French about the Black Prince’s
massacre at Limoges in 1370, as if there were some hidden reason which he ought to know. Curwen
asked the prisoner—if prisoner it were—whether the order to slay was given because of
the Sign of the Goat found on the altar in the ancient Roman crypt beneath the Cathedral, or
whether the Dark Man of the Haute Vienne Coven had spoken the Three Words. Failing to obtain
replies, the inquisitor had seemingly resorted to extreme means; for there was a terrific shriek
followed by silence and muttering and a bumping sound.
None of these colloquies were ever ocularly witnessed, since the windows were
always heavily draped. Once, though, during a discourse in an unknown tongue, a shadow was seen on
the curtain which startled Weeden exceedingly; reminding him of one of the puppets in a show he had
seen in the autumn of 1764 in Hacker’s Hall, when a man from Germantown, Pennsylvania, had
given a clever mechanical spectacle advertised as a “View of the Famous City of Jerusalem, in
which are represented Jerusalem, the Temple of Solomon, his Royal Throne, the noted Towers, and
Hills, likewise the Sufferings of Our Saviour from the Garden of Gethsemane to the Cross on the
Hill of Golgotha; an artful piece of Statuary, Worthy to be seen by the Curious.” It was on
this occasion that the listener, who had crept close to the window of the front room whence the
speaking proceeded, gave a start which roused the old Indian pair and caused them to loose the dogs
on him. After that no more conversations were ever heard in the house, and Weeden and Smith
concluded that Curwen had transferred his field of action to regions below.
That such regions in truth existed, seemed amply clear from many things. Faint
cries and groans unmistakably came up now and then from what appeared to be the solid earth in
places far from any structure; whilst hidden in the bushes along the river-bank in the rear, where
the high ground sloped steeply down to the valley of the Pawtuxet, there was found an arched oaken
door in a frame of heavy masonry, which was obviously an entrance to caverns within the hill. When
or how these catacombs could have been constructed, Weeden was unable to say; but he frequently
pointed out how easily the place might have been reached by bands of unseen workmen from the river.
Joseph Curwen put his mongrel seamen to diverse uses indeed! During the heavy spring rains of 1769
the two watchers kept a sharp eye on the steep river-bank to see if any subterrene secrets might be
washed to light, and were rewarded by the sight of a profusion of both human and animal bones in
places where deep gullies had been worn in the banks. Naturally there might be many explanations of
such things in the rear of a stock farm, and in a locality where old Indian burying-grounds were
common, but Weeden and Smith drew their own inferences.
It was in January 1770, whilst Weeden and Smith were still debating vainly on
what, if anything, to think or do about the whole bewildering business, that the incident of the
Fortaleza occurred. Exasperated by the burning of the revenue sloop Liberty at
Newport during the previous summer, the customs fleet under Admiral Wallace had adopted an
increased vigilance concerning strange vessels; and on this occasion His
Majesty’s armed schooner Cygnet, under Capt. Charles Leslie, captured
after a short pursuit one early morning the snow Fortaleza of Barcelona,
Spain, under Capt. Manuel Arruda, bound according to its log from Grand Cairo,
Egypt, to Providence. When searched for contraband material, this ship revealed
the astonishing fact that its cargo consisted exclusively of Egyptian mummies,
consigned to “Sailor A. B. C.”, who would come to remove his goods in a lighter
just off Namquit Point and whose identity Capt. Arruda felt himself in honour
bound not to reveal. The Vice-Admiralty Court at Newport, at a loss what to do
in view of the non-contraband nature of the cargo on the one hand and of the
unlawful secrecy of the entry on the other hand, compromised on Collector
Robinson’s recommendation by freeing the ship but forbidding it a port in Rhode Island
waters. There were later rumours of its having been seen in Boston Harbour, though it never openly
entered the Port of Boston.
This extraordinary incident did not fail of wide remark in Providence, and there
were not many who doubted the existence of some connexion between the cargo of mummies and the
sinister Joseph Curwen. His exotic studies and his curious chemical importations being common
knowledge, and his fondness for graveyards being common suspicion; it did not take much imagination
to link him with a freakish importation which could not conceivably have been destined for anyone
else in the town. As if conscious of this natural belief, Curwen took care to speak casually on
several occasions of the chemical value of the balsams found in mummies; thinking perhaps that he
might make the affair seem less unnatural, yet stopping just short of admitting his participation.
Weeden and Smith, of course, felt no doubt whatsoever of the significance of the thing; and
indulged in the wildest theories concerning Curwen and his monstrous labours.
The following spring, like that of the year before, had heavy rains; and the
watchers kept careful track of the river-bank behind the Curwen farm. Large sections were washed
away, and a certain number of bones discovered; but no glimpse was afforded of any actual
subterranean chambers or burrows. Something was rumoured, however, at the village of Pawtuxet about
a mile below, where the river flows in falls over a rocky terrace to join the placid landlocked
cove. There, where quaint old cottages climbed the hill from the rustic bridge, and fishing-smacks
lay anchored at their sleepy docks, a vague report went round of things that were floating down the
river and flashing into sight for a minute as they went over the falls. Of course the Pawtuxet is a
long river which winds through many settled regions abounding in graveyards, and of course the
spring rains had been very heavy; but the fisherfolk about the bridge did not like the wild way
that one of the things stared as it shot down to the still water below, or the way that another
half cried out although its condition had greatly departed from that of objects which normally cry
out. That rumour sent Smith—for Weeden was just then at sea—in haste to the river-bank
behind the farm; where surely enough there remained the evidences of an extensive cave-in. There
was, however, no trace of a passage into the steep bank; for the miniature avalanche had left
behind a solid wall of mixed earth and shrubbery from aloft. Smith went to the extent of some
experimental digging, but was deterred by lack of success—or perhaps by fear of possible
success. It is interesting to speculate on what the persistent and revengeful Weeden would have
done had he been ashore at the time.
4.
By the autumn of 1770 Weeden decided that the time was ripe to tell others of his
discoveries; for he had a large number of facts to link together, and a second eye-witness to
refute the possible charge that jealousy and vindictiveness had spurred his fancy. As his first
confidant he selected Capt. James Mathewson of the Enterprise, who on the one hand knew him
well enough not to doubt his veracity, and on the other hand was sufficiently influential in the
town to be heard in turn with respect. The colloquy took place in an upper room of Sabin’s
Tavern near the docks, with Smith present to corroborate virtually every statement; and it could be
seen that Capt. Mathewson was tremendously impressed. Like nearly everyone else in the town, he had
had black suspicions of his own anent Joseph Curwen; hence it needed only this confirmation and
enlargement of data to convince him absolutely. At the end of the conference he was very grave, and
enjoined strict silence upon the two younger men. He would, he said, transmit the information
separately to some ten or so of the most learned and prominent citizens of Providence; ascertaining
their views and following whatever advice they might have to offer. Secrecy would probably be
essential in any case, for this was no matter that the town constables or militia could cope with;
and above all else the excitable crowd must be kept in ignorance, lest there be enacted in these
already troublous times a repetition of that frightful Salem panic of less than a century before
which had first brought Curwen hither.
The right persons to tell, he believed, would be Dr. Benjamin West, whose pamphlet
on the late transit of Venus proved him a scholar and keen thinker; Rev. James Manning, President
of the College which had just moved up from Warren and was temporarily housed in the new King
Street schoolhouse awaiting the completion of its building on the hill above Presbyterian-Lane;
ex-Governor Stephen Hopkins, who had been a member of the Philosophical Society at Newport, and was
a man of very broad perceptions; John Carter, publisher of the Gazette; all four of the
Brown brothers, John, Joseph, Nicholas, and Moses, who formed the recognised local magnates, and of
whom Joseph was an amateur scientist of parts; old Dr. Jabez Bowen, whose erudition was
considerable, and who had much first-hand knowledge of Curwen’s odd purchases; and Capt.
Abraham Whipple, a privateersman of phenomenal boldness and energy who could be counted on to lead
in any active measures needed. These men, if favourable, might eventually be brought together for
collective deliberation; and with them would rest the responsibility of deciding whether or not to
inform the Governor of the Colony, Joseph Wanton of Newport, before taking action.
The mission of Capt. Mathewson prospered beyond his highest expectations; for
whilst he found one or two of the chosen confidants somewhat sceptical of the possible ghastly side
of Weeden’s tale, there was not one who did not think it necessary to take some sort of
secret and coördinated action. Curwen, it was clear, formed a vague potential menace to the
welfare of the town and Colony; and must be eliminated at any cost. Late in December 1770 a group
of eminent townsmen met at the home of Stephen Hopkins and debated tentative measures.
Weeden’s notes, which he had given to Capt. Mathewson, were carefully read; and he and Smith
were summoned to give testimony anent details. Something very like fear seized the whole assemblage
before the meeting was over, though there ran through that fear a grim determination which Capt.
Whipple’s bluff and resonant profanity best expressed. They would not notify the Governor,
because a more than legal course seemed necessary. With hidden powers of uncertain extent
apparently at his disposal, Curwen was not a man who could safely be warned to leave town. Nameless
reprisals might ensue, and even if the sinister creature complied, the removal would be no more
than the shifting of an unclean burden to another place. The times were lawless, and men who had
flouted the King’s revenue forces for years were not the ones to balk at sterner things when
duty impelled. Curwen must be surprised at his Pawtuxet farm by a large raiding-party of seasoned
privateersmen and given one decisive chance to explain himself. If he proved a madman, amusing
himself with shrieks and imaginary conversations in different voices, he would be properly
confined. If something graver appeared, and if the underground horrors indeed turned out to be
real, he and all with him must die. It could be done quietly, and even the widow and her father
need not be told how it came about.
While these serious steps were under discussion there occurred in the town an
incident so terrible and inexplicable that for a time little else was mentioned for miles around.
In the middle of a moonlight January night with heavy snow underfoot there resounded over the river
and up the hill a shocking series of cries which brought sleepy heads to every window; and people
around Weybosset Point saw a great white thing plunging frantically along the badly cleared space
in front of the Turk’s Head. There was a baying of dogs in the distance, but this subsided as
soon as the clamour of the awakened town became audible. Parties of men with lanterns and muskets
hurried out to see what was happening, but nothing rewarded their search. The next morning,
however, a giant, muscular body, stark naked, was found on the jams of ice around the southern
piers of the Great Bridge, where the Long Dock stretched out beside Abbott’s distil-house,
and the identity of this object became a theme for endless speculation and whispering. It was not
so much the younger as the older folk who whispered, for only in the patriarchs did that rigid face
with horror-bulging eyes strike any chord of memory. They, shaking as they did so, exchanged
furtive murmurs of wonder and fear; for in those stiff, hideous features lay a resemblance so
marvellous as to be almost an identity—and that identity was with a man who had died full
fifty years before.
Ezra Weeden was present at the finding; and remembering the baying of the night
before, set out along Weybosset Street and across Muddy Dock Bridge whence the sound had come. He
had a curious expectancy, and was not surprised when, reaching the edge of the settled district
where the street merged into the Pawtuxet Road, he came upon some very curious tracks in the snow.
The naked giant had been pursued by dogs and many booted men, and the returning tracks of the
hounds and their masters could be easily traced. They had given up the chase upon coming too near
the town. Weeden smiled grimly, and as a perfunctory detail traced the footprints back to their
source. It was the Pawtuxet farm of Joseph Curwen, as he well knew it would be; and he would have
given much had the yard been less confusingly trampled. As it was, he dared not seem too interested
in full daylight. Dr. Bowen, to whom Weeden went at once with his report, performed an autopsy on
the strange corpse, and discovered peculiarities which baffled him utterly. The digestive tracts of
the huge man seemed never to have been in use, whilst the whole skin had a coarse, loosely knit
texture impossible to account for. Impressed by what the old men whispered of this body’s
likeness to the long-dead blacksmith Daniel Green, whose great-grandson Aaron Hoppin was a
supercargo in Curwen’s employ, Weeden asked casual questions till he found where Green was
buried. That night a party of ten visited the old North Burying Ground opposite Herrenden’s
Lane and opened a grave. They found it vacant, precisely as they had expected.
Meanwhile arrangements had been made with the post riders to intercept Joseph
Curwen’s mail, and shortly before the incident of the naked body there was found a letter
from one Jedediah Orne of Salem which made the coöperating citizens think deeply. Parts of it,
copied and preserved in the private archives of the Smith family where Charles Ward found it, ran
as follows:
“I delight that you continue in ye Gett’g at Olde Matters in your Way, and doe not think better was
done at Mr. Hutchinson’s in Salem-Village. Certainely, there was Noth’g butt ye liveliest Awfulness in that which H. rais’d upp from What he
cou’d gather onlie a part of. What you sente, did not Worke, whether because of Any Thing
miss’g, or because ye Wordes were not Righte from my
Speak’g or yr Copy’g. I alone am at a Loss. I have not
ye Chymicall art to followe Borellus, and owne my Self confounded
by ye VII. Booke of ye Necronomicon
that you recommende. But I wou’d have you Observe what was tolde to us aboute tak’g
Care whom to calle up, for you are Sensible what Mr. Mather writ in ye Magnalia of ——, and can judge how truely that Horrendous
thing is reported. I say to you againe, doe not call up Any that you can not put downe; by the
Which I meane, Any that can in Turne call up somewhat against you, whereby your Powerfullest
Devices may not be of use. Ask of the Lesser, lest the Greater shall not wish to Answer, and shall
commande more than you. I was frighted when I read of your know’g what Ben Zariatnatmik hadde
in his ebony Boxe, for I was conscious who must have tolde you. And againe I ask that you shalle
write me as Jedediah and not Simon. In this Community a Man may not live too long, and you knowe my
Plan by which I came back as my Son. I am desirous you will Acquaint me with what ye Blacke Man learnt from Sylvanus Cocidius in ye Vault, under ye Roman Wall, and will be
oblig’d for ye Lend’g of ye MS. you speak of.”
Another and unsigned letter from Philadelphia provoked equal thought, especially
for the following passage:
“I will observe what you say respecting the sending of Accounts
only by yr Vessels, but can not always be certain when to expect
them. In the Matter spoke of, I require onlie one more thing; but wish to be sure I apprehend you
exactly. You inform me, that no Part must be missing if the finest Effects are to be had, but you
can not but know how hard it is to be sure. It seems a great Hazard and Burthen to take away the
whole Box, and in Town (i.e. St. Peter’s, St. Paul’s, St. Mary’s, or Christ
Church) it can scarce be done at all. But I know what Imperfections were in the one I rais’d
up October last, and how many live Specimens you were forc’d to imploy before you hit upon
the right Mode in the year 1766; so will be guided by you in all Matters. I am impatient for
yr Brig, and inquire daily at Mr. Biddle’s
Wharf.”
A third suspicious letter was in an unknown tongue and even an unknown alphabet.
In the Smith diary found by Charles Ward a single oft-repeated combination of characters is
clumsily copied; and authorities at Brown University have pronounced the alphabet Amharic or
Abyssinian, although they do not recognise the word. None of these epistles was ever delivered to
Curwen, though the disappearance of Jedediah Orne from Salem as recorded shortly afterward shewed
that the Providence men took certain quiet steps. The Pennsylvania Historical Society also has some
curious letters received by Dr. Shippen regarding the presence of an unwholesome character in
Philadelphia. But more decisive steps were in the air, and it is in the secret assemblages of sworn
and tested sailors and faithful old privateersmen in the Brown warehouses by night that we must
look for the main fruits of Weeden’s disclosures. Slowly and surely a plan of campaign was
under development which would leave no trace of Joseph Curwen’s noxious mysteries.
Curwen, despite all precautions, apparently felt that something was in the wind;
for he was now remarked to wear an unusually worried look. His coach was seen at all hours in the
town and on the Pawtuxet Road, and he dropped little by little the air of forced geniality with
which he had latterly sought to combat the town’s prejudice. The nearest neighbours to his
farm, the Fenners, one night remarked a great shaft of light shooting into the sky from some
aperture in the roof of that cryptical stone building with the high, excessively narrow windows;
an event which they quickly communicated to John Brown in Providence. Mr. Brown had become the
executive leader of the select group bent on Curwen’s extirpation, and had informed the
Fenners that some action was about to be taken. This he deemed needful because of the impossibility
of their not witnessing the final raid; and he explained his course by saying that Curwen was known
to be a spy of the customs officers at Newport, against whom the hand of every Providence shipper,
merchant, and farmer was openly or clandestinely raised. Whether the ruse was wholly believed by
neighbours who had seen so many queer things is not certain; but at any rate the Fenners were
willing to connect any evil with a man of such queer ways. To them Mr. Brown had entrusted the duty
of watching the Curwen farmhouse, and of regularly reporting every incident which took place
there.
5.
The probability that Curwen was on guard and attempting unusual things, as
suggested by the odd shaft of light, precipitated at last the action so carefully devised by the
band of serious citizens. According to the Smith diary a company of about 100 men met at 10 p.m. on
Friday, April 12th, 1771, in the great room of Thurston’s Tavern at the Sign of the Golden
Lion on Weybosset Point across the Bridge. Of the guiding group of prominent men in addition to the
leader John Brown there were present Dr. Bowen, with his case of surgical instruments, President
Manning without the great periwig (the largest in the Colonies) for which he was noted, Governor
Hopkins, wrapped in his dark cloak and accompanied by his seafaring brother Esek, whom he had
initiated at the last moment with the permission of the rest, John Carter, Capt. Mathewson, and
Capt. Whipple, who was to lead the actual raiding party. These chiefs conferred apart in a rear
chamber, after which Capt. Whipple emerged to the great room and gave the gathered seamen their
last oaths and instructions. Eleazar Smith was with the leaders as they sat in the rear apartment
awaiting the arrival of Ezra Weeden, whose duty was to keep track of Curwen and report the
departure of his coach for the farm.
About 10:30 a heavy rumble was heard on the Great Bridge, followed by the sound of
a coach in the street outside; and at that hour there was no need of waiting for Weeden in order to
know that the doomed man had set out for his last night of unhallowed wizardry. A moment later, as
the receding coach clattered faintly over the Muddy Dock Bridge, Weeden appeared; and the raiders
fell silently into military order in the street, shouldering the firelocks, fowling-pieces, or
whaling harpoons which they had with them. Weeden and Smith were with the party, and of the
deliberating citizens there were present for active service Capt. Whipple, the leader, Capt. Esek
Hopkins, John Carter, President Manning, Capt. Mathewson, and Dr. Bowen; together with Moses Brown,
who had come up at the eleventh hour though absent from the preliminary session in the tavern. All
these freemen and their hundred sailors began the long march without delay, grim and a trifle
apprehensive as they left the Muddy Dock behind and mounted the gentle rise of Broad Street toward
the Pawtuxet Road. Just beyond Elder Snow’s church some of the men turned back to take a
parting look at Providence lying outspread under the early spring stars. Steeples and gables rose
dark and shapely, and salt breezes swept up gently from the cove north of the Bridge. Vega was
climbing above the great hill across the water, whose crest of trees was broken by the roof-line of
the unfinished College edifice. At the foot of that hill, and along the narrow mounting lanes of
its side, the old town dreamed; Old Providence, for whose safety and sanity so monstrous and
colossal a blasphemy was about to be wiped out.
An hour and a quarter later the raiders arrived, as previously agreed, at the
Fenner farmhouse; where they heard a final report on their intended victim. He had reached his farm
over half an hour before, and the strange light had soon afterward shot once into the sky, but
there were no lights in any visible windows. This was always the case of late. Even as this news
was given another great glare arose toward the south, and the party realised that they had indeed
come close to the scene of awesome and unnatural wonders. Capt. Whipple now ordered his force to
separate into three divisions; one of twenty men under Eleazar Smith to strike across to the shore
and guard the landing-place against possible reinforcements for Curwen until summoned by a
messenger for desperate service, a second of twenty men under Capt. Esek Hopkins to steal down into
the river valley behind the Curwen farm and demolish with axes or gunpowder the oaken door in the
high, steep bank, and the third to close in on the house and adjacent buildings themselves. Of this
division one third was to be led by Capt. Mathewson to the cryptical stone edifice with high narrow
windows, another third to follow Capt. Whipple himself to the main farmhouse, and the remaining
third to preserve a circle around the whole group of buildings until summoned by a final emergency
signal.
The river party would break down the hillside door at the sound of a single
whistle-blast, then waiting and capturing anything which might issue from the regions within. At
the sound of two whistle-blasts it would advance through the aperture to oppose the enemy or join
the rest of the raiding contingent. The party at the stone building would accept these respective
signals in an analogous manner; forcing an entrance at the first, and at the second descending
whatever passage into the ground might be discovered, and joining the general or focal warfare
expected to take place within the caverns. A third or emergency signal of three blasts would summon
the immediate reserve from its general guard duty; its twenty men dividing equally and entering the
unknown depths through both farmhouse and stone building. Capt. Whipple’s belief in the
existence of catacombs was absolute, and he took no alternative into consideration when making his
plans. He had with him a whistle of great power and shrillness, and did not fear any upsetting or
misunderstanding of signals. The final reserve at the landing, of course, was nearly out of the
whistle’s range; hence would require a special messenger if needed for help. Moses Brown and
John Carter went with Capt. Hopkins to the river-bank, while President Manning was detailed with
Capt. Mathewson to the stone building. Dr. Bowen, with Ezra Weeden, remained in Capt.
Whipple’s party which was to storm the farmhouse itself. The attack was to begin as soon as a
messenger from Capt. Hopkins had joined Capt. Whipple to notify him of the river party’s
readiness. The leader would then deliver the loud single blast, and the various advance parties
would commence their simultaneous attack on three points. Shortly before 1 a.m. the three divisions
left the Fenner farmhouse; one to guard the landing, another to seek the river valley and the
hillside door, and the third to subdivide and attend to the actual buildings of the Curwen
farm.
Eleazar Smith, who accompanied the shore-guarding party, records in his diary an
uneventful march and a long wait on the bluff by the bay; broken once by what seemed to be the
distant sound of the signal whistle and again by a peculiar muffled blend of roaring and crying and
a powder blast which seemed to come from the same direction. Later on one man thought he caught
some distant gunshots, and still later Smith himself felt the throb of titanic and thunderous words
resounding in upper air. It was just before dawn that a single haggard messenger with wild eyes and
a hideous unknown odour about his clothing appeared and told the detachment to disperse quietly to
their homes and never again think or speak of the night’s doings or of him who had been
Joseph Curwen. Something about the bearing of the messenger carried a conviction which his mere
words could never have conveyed; for though he was a seaman well known to many of them, there was
something obscurely lost or gained in his soul which set him for evermore apart. It was the same
later on when they met other old companions who had gone into that zone of horror. Most of them had
lost or gained something imponderable and indescribable. They had seen or heard or felt something
which was not for human creatures, and could not forget it. From them there was never any gossip,
for to even the commonest of mortal instincts there are terrible boundaries. And from that single
messenger the party at the shore caught a nameless awe which almost sealed their own lips. Very few
are the rumours which ever came from any of them, and Eleazar Smith’s diary is the only
written record which has survived from that whole expedition which set forth from the Sign of the
Golden Lion under the stars.
Charles Ward, however, discovered another vague sidelight in some Fenner
correspondence which he found in New London, where he knew another branch of the family had lived.
It seems that the Fenners, from whose house the doomed farm was distantly visible, had watched the
departing columns of raiders; and had heard very clearly the angry barking of the Curwen dogs,
followed by the first shrill blast which precipitated the attack. This blast had been followed by a
repetition of the great shaft of light from the stone building, and in another moment, after a
quick sounding of the second signal ordering a general invasion, there had come a subdued prattle
of musketry followed by a horrible roaring cry which the correspondent Luke Fenner had represented
in his epistle by the characters “Waaaahrrrrr—R’waaahrrr”. This cry,
however, had possessed a quality which no mere writing could convey, and the correspondent mentions
that his mother fainted completely at the sound. It was later repeated less loudly, and further but
more muffled evidences of gunfire ensued; together with a loud explosion of powder from the
direction of the river. About an hour afterward all the dogs began to bark frightfully, and there
were vague ground rumblings so marked that the candlesticks tottered on the mantelpiece. A strong
smell of sulphur was noted; and Luke Fenner’s father declared that he heard the third or
emergency whistle signal, though the others failed to detect it. Muffled musketry sounded again,
followed by a deep scream less piercing but even more horrible than those which had preceded it; a
kind of throaty, nastily plastic cough or gurgle whose quality as a scream must have come more from
its continuity and psychological import than from its actual acoustic value.
Then the flaming thing burst into sight at a point where the Curwen farm ought to
lie, and the human cries of desperate and frightened men were heard. Muskets flashed and cracked,
and the flaming thing fell to the ground. A second flaming thing appeared, and a shriek of human
origin was plainly distinguished. Fenner wrote that he could even gather a few words belched in
frenzy: “Almighty, protect thy lamb!” Then there were more shots, and the second
flaming thing fell. After that came silence for about three-quarters of an hour; at the end of
which time little Arthur Fenner, Luke’s brother, exclaimed that he saw ‘a red
fog’ going up to the stars from the accursed farm in the distance. No one but the child can
testify to this, but Luke admits the significant coincidence implied by the panic of almost
convulsive fright which at the same moment arched the backs and stiffened the fur of the three cats
then within the room.
Five minutes later a chill wind blew up, and the air became suffused with such an
intolerable stench that only the strong freshness of the sea could have prevented its being noticed
by the shore party or by any wakeful souls in Pawtuxet village. This stench was nothing which any
of the Fenners had ever encountered before, and produced a kind of clutching, amorphous fear beyond
that of the tomb or the charnel-house. Close upon it came the awful voice which no hapless hearer
will ever be able to forget. It thundered out of the sky like a doom, and windows rattled as its
echoes died away. It was deep and musical; powerful as a bass organ, but evil as the forbidden
books of the Arabs. What it said no man can tell, for it spoke in an unknown tongue, but this is
the writing Luke Fenner set down to portray the daemoniac intonations:
“DEESMEES–JESHET–BONE DOSEFE DUVEMA–ENITEMOSS”. Not till the year
1919 did any soul link this crude transcript with anything else in mortal knowledge, but Charles
Ward paled as he recognised what Mirandola had denounced in shudders as the ultimate horror among
black magic’s incantations.
An unmistakably human shout or deep chorused scream seemed to answer this malign
wonder from the Curwen farm, after which the unknown stench grew complex with an added odour
equally intolerable. A wailing distinctly different from the scream now burst out, and was
protracted ululantly in rising and falling paroxysms. At times it became almost articulate, though
no auditor could trace any definite words; and at one point it seemed to verge toward the confines
of diabolic and hysterical laughter. Then a yell of utter, ultimate fright and stark madness
wrenched from scores of human throats—a yell which came strong and clear despite the depth
from which it must have burst; after which darkness and silence ruled all things. Spirals of acrid
smoke ascended to blot out the stars, though no flames appeared and no buildings were observed to
be gone or injured on the following day.
Toward dawn two frightened messengers with monstrous and unplaceable odours
saturating their clothing knocked at the Fenner door and requested a keg of rum, for which they
paid very well indeed. One of them told the family that the affair of Joseph Curwen was over, and
that the events of the night were not to be mentioned again. Arrogant as the order seemed, the
aspect of him who gave it took away all resentment and lent it a fearsome authority; so that only
these furtive letters of Luke Fenner, which he urged his Connecticut relative to destroy, remain to
tell what was seen and heard. The non-compliance of that relative, whereby the letters were saved
after all, has alone kept the matter from a merciful oblivion. Charles Ward had one detail to add
as a result of a long canvass of Pawtuxet residents for ancestral traditions. Old Charles Slocum of
that village said that there was known to his grandfather a queer rumour concerning a charred,
distorted body found in the fields a week after the death of Joseph Curwen was announced. What kept
the talk alive was the notion that this body, so far as could be seen in its burnt and twisted
condition, was neither thoroughly human nor wholly allied to any animal which Pawtuxet folk had
ever seen or read about.
6.
Not one man who participated in that terrible raid could ever be induced to say a
word concerning it, and every fragment of the vague data which survives comes from those outside
the final fighting party. There is something frightful in the care with which these actual raiders
destroyed each scrap which bore the least allusion to the matter. Eight sailors had been killed,
but although their bodies were not produced their families were satisfied with the statement that a
clash with customs officers had occurred. The same statement also covered the numerous cases of
wounds, all of which were extensively bandaged and treated only by Dr. Jabez Bowen, who had
accompanied the party. Hardest to explain was the nameless odour clinging to all the raiders, a
thing which was discussed for weeks. Of the citizen leaders, Capt. Whipple and Moses Brown were
most severely hurt, and letters of their wives testify the bewilderment which their reticence and
close guarding of their bandages produced. Psychologically every participant was aged, sobered, and
shaken. It is fortunate that they were all strong men of action and simple, orthodox religionists,
for with more subtle introspectiveness and mental complexity they would have fared ill indeed.
President Manning was the most disturbed; but even he outgrew the darkest shadow, and smothered
memories in prayers. Every man of those leaders had a stirring part to play in later years, and it
is perhaps fortunate that this is so. Little more than a twelvemonth afterward Capt. Whipple led
the mob who burnt the revenue ship Gaspee, and in this bold act we may trace one step in the
blotting out of unwholesome images.
There was delivered to the widow of Joseph Curwen a sealed leaden coffin of
curious design, obviously found ready on the spot when needed, in which she was told her
husband’s body lay. He had, it was explained, been killed in a customs battle about which it
was not politic to give details. More than this no tongue ever uttered of Joseph Curwen’s
end, and Charles Ward had only a single hint wherewith to construct a theory. This hint was the
merest thread—a shaky underscoring of a passage in Jedediah Orne’s confiscated letter
to Curwen, as partly copied in Ezra Weeden’s handwriting. The copy was found in the
possession of Smith’s descendants; and we are left to decide whether Weeden gave it to his
companion after the end, as a mute clue to the abnormality which had occurred, or whether, as is
more probable, Smith had it before, and added the underscoring himself from what he had managed to
extract from his friend by shrewd guessing and adroit cross-questioning. The underlined passage is
merely this:
“I say to you againe, doe not call up Any that you can not
put downe; by the Which I meane, Any that can in Turne call up somewhat against you, whereby your
Powerfullest Devices may not be of use. Ask of the Lesser, lest the Greater shall not wish to
Answer, and shall commande more than you.”

In the light of this passage, and reflecting on what last unmentionable allies a beaten man might
try to summon in his direst extremity, Charles Ward may well have wondered whether any citizen of
Providence killed Joseph Curwen.
The deliberate effacement of every memory of the dead man from Providence life and
annals was vastly aided by the influence of the raiding leaders. They had not at first meant to be
so thorough, and had allowed the widow and her father and child to remain in ignorance of the true
conditions; but Capt. Tillinghast was an astute man, and soon uncovered enough rumours to whet his
horror and cause him to demand that his daughter and granddaughter change their name, burn the
library and all remaining papers, and chisel the inscription from the slate slab above Joseph
Curwen’s grave. He knew Capt. Whipple well, and probably extracted more hints from that bluff
mariner than anyone else ever gained respecting the end of the accused sorcerer.
From that time on the obliteration of Curwen’s memory became increasingly
rigid, extending at last by common consent even to the town records and files of the
Gazette. It can be compared in spirit only to the hush that lay on Oscar Wilde’s name
for a decade after his disgrace, and in extent only to the fate of that sinful King of Runazar in
Lord Dunsany’s tale, whom the Gods decided must not only cease to be, but must cease ever to
have been.
Mrs. Tillinghast, as the widow became known after 1772, sold the house in Olney
Court and resided with her father in Power’s Lane till her death in 1817. The farm at
Pawtuxet, shunned by every living soul, remained to moulder through the years; and seemed to decay
with unaccountable rapidity. By 1780 only the stone and brickwork were standing, and by 1800 even
these had fallen to shapeless heaps. None ventured to pierce the tangled shrubbery on the
river-bank behind which the hillside door may have lain, nor did any try to frame a definite image
of the scenes amidst which Joseph Curwen departed from the horrors he had wrought.
Only robust old Capt. Whipple was heard by alert listeners to mutter once in a
while to himself, “Pox on that ———, but he had no business to laugh while
he screamed. ’Twas as though the damn’d ——— had some’at up his
sleeve. For half a crown I’d burn his ——— house.”
III. A Search and an Evocation1.

Charles Ward, as we have seen, first learned in 1918 of his descent from Joseph Curwen. That he at
once took an intense interest in everything pertaining to the bygone mystery is not to be wondered
at; for every vague rumour that he had heard of Curwen now became something vital to himself, in
whom flowed Curwen’s blood. No spirited and imaginative genealogist could have done otherwise
than begin forthwith an avid and systematic collection of Curwen data.
In his first delvings there was not the slightest attempt at secrecy; so that even
Dr. Lyman hesitates to date the youth’s madness from any period before the close of 1919. He
talked freely with his family—though his mother was not particularly pleased to own an
ancestor like Curwen—and with the officials of the various museums and libraries he visited.
In applying to private families for records thought to be in their possession he made no
concealment of his object, and shared the somewhat amused scepticism with which the accounts of the
old diarists and letter-writers were regarded. He often expressed a keen wonder as to what really
had taken place a century and a half before at that Pawtuxet farmhouse whose site he vainly tried
to find, and what Joseph Curwen really had been.
When he came across the Smith diary and archives and encountered the letter from
Jedediah Orne he decided to visit Salem and look up Curwen’s early activities and connexions
there, which he did during the Easter vacation of 1919. At the Essex Institute, which was well
known to him from former sojourns in the glamorous old town of crumbling Puritan gables and
clustered gambrel roofs, he was very kindly received, and unearthed there a considerable amount of
Curwen data. He found that his ancestor was born in Salem-Village, now Danvers, seven miles from
town, on the eighteenth of February (O.S.) 1662–3; and that he had run away to sea at the age
of fifteen, not appearing again for nine years, when he returned with the speech, dress, and
manners of a native Englishman and settled in Salem proper. At that time he had little to do with
his family, but spent most of his hours with the curious books he had brought from Europe, and the
strange chemicals which came for him on ships from England, France, and Holland. Certain trips of
his into the country were the objects of much local inquisitiveness, and were whisperingly
associated with vague rumours of fires on the hills at night.
Curwen’s only close friends had been one Edward Hutchinson of Salem-Village
and one Simon Orne of Salem. With these men he was often seen in conference about the Common, and
visits among them were by no means infrequent. Hutchinson had a house well out toward the woods,
and it was not altogether liked by sensitive people because of the sounds heard there at night. He
was said to entertain strange visitors, and the lights seen from his windows were not always of the
same colour. The knowledge he displayed concerning long-dead persons and long-forgotten events was
considered distinctly unwholesome, and he disappeared about the time the witchcraft panic began,
never to be heard from again. At that time Joseph Curwen also departed, but his settlement in
Providence was soon learned of. Simon Orne lived in Salem until 1720, when his failure to grow
visibly old began to excite attention. He thereafter disappeared, though thirty years later his
precise counterpart and self-styled son turned up to claim his property. The claim was allowed on
the strength of documents in Simon Orne’s known hand, and Jedediah Orne continued to dwell in
Salem till 1771, when certain letters from Providence citizens to the Rev. Thomas Barnard and
others brought about his quiet removal to parts unknown.
Certain documents by and about all of these strange characters were available at
the Essex Institute, the Court House, and the Registry of Deeds, and included both harmless
commonplaces such as land titles and bills of sale, and furtive fragments of a more provocative
nature. There were four or five unmistakable allusions to them on the witchcraft trial records; as
when one Hepzibah Lawson swore on July 10, 1692, at the Court of Oyer and Terminer under Judge
Hathorne, that ‘fortie Witches and the Blacke Man were wont to meete in the Woodes behind Mr.
Hutchinson’s house’, and one Amity How declared at a session of August 8th before Judge
Gedney that ‘Mr. G. B. (Rev. George Burroughs) on that Nighte putt ye Divell his Marke upon Bridget S., Jonathan A., Simon O.,
Deliverance W., Joseph C., Susan P., Mehitable C., and Deborah B.’ Then there was a
catalogue of Hutchinson’s uncanny library as found after his disappearance, and an unfinished
manuscript in his handwriting, couched in a cipher none could read. Ward had a photostatic copy of
this manuscript made, and began to work casually on the cipher as soon as it was delivered to him.
After the following August his labours on the cipher became intense and feverish, and there is
reason to believe from his speech and conduct that he hit upon the key before October or November.
He never stated, though, whether or not he had succeeded.
But of the greatest immediate interest was the Orne material. It took Ward only a
short time to prove from identity of penmanship a thing he had already considered established from
the text of the letter to Curwen; namely, that Simon Orne and his supposed son were one and the
same person. As Orne had said to his correspondent, it was hardly safe to live too long in Salem,
hence he resorted to a thirty-year sojourn abroad, and did not return to claim his lands except as
a representative of a new generation. Orne had apparently been careful to destroy most of his
correspondence, but the citizens who took action in 1771 found and preserved a few letters and
papers which excited their wonder. There were cryptic formulae and diagrams in his and other hands
which Ward now either copied with care or had photographed, and one extremely mysterious letter in
a chirography that the searcher recognised from items in the Registry of Deeds as positively Joseph
Curwen’s.
This Curwen letter, though undated as to the year, was evidently not the one in
answer to which Orne had written the confiscated missive; and from internal evidence Ward placed it
not much later than 1750. It may not be amiss to give the text in full, as a sample of the style of
one whose history was so dark and terrible. The recipient is addressed as “Simon”, but
a line (whether drawn by Curwen or Orne Ward could not tell) is run through the word.
Prouidence, I. May (Ut. vulgo)
Brother:—
My honour’d Antient ffriende, due Respects and earnest Wishes to Him whom we serve for yr eternall Power. I am just come upon That which you ought to knowe,
concern’g the Matter of the Laste Extremitie and what to doe regard’g yt. I am not
dispos’d to followe you in go’g Away on acct. of my Yeares, for Prouidence hath not
ye Sharpeness of ye Bay in
hunt’g oute uncommon Things and bringinge to Tryall. I am ty’d up in Shippes and
Goodes, and cou’d not doe as you did, besides the Whiche my ffarme at Patuxet hath under it
What you Knowe, that wou’d not waite for my com’g Backe as an Other.
But I am not unreadie for harde ffortunes, as I haue tolde you, and haue longe
work’d upon ye Way of get’g Backe after ye Laste. I laste Night strucke on ye
Wordes that bringe up YOGGE-SOTHOTHE, and sawe for ye firste Time
that fface spoke of by Ibn Schacabao in ye ——. And IT said, that ye III Psalme in ye Liber-Damnatus holdes
ye Clauicle. With Sunne in V House, Saturne in Trine, drawe ye Pentagram of Fire, and saye ye ninth
Uerse thrice. This Uerse repeate eache Roodemas and Hallow’s Eue; and ye Thing will breede in ye Outside
Spheres.
And of ye Seede of Olde shal One be borne who
shal looke Backe, tho’ know’g not what he seekes.
Yett will this availe Nothing if there be no Heir, and if the Saltes, or the Way
to make the Saltes, bee not Readie for his Hande; and here I will owne, I have not taken needed
Stepps nor founde Much. Ye Process is plaguy harde to come neare; and it uses up such a Store of
Specimens, I am harde putte to it to get Enough, notwithstand’g the Sailors I have from
ye Indies. Ye People aboute are become curious, but I can stande
them off. Ye Gentry are worse than the Populace, be’g more Circumstantiall in their Accts.
and more believ’d in what they tell. That Parson and Mr. Merritt have talk’d some, I am
fearfull, but no Thing soe far is Dangerous. Ye Chymical substances are easie of get’g, there
be’g II. goode Chymists in Towne, Dr. Bowen and Sam: Carew. I am foll’g oute what
Borellus saith, and haue Helpe in Abdool Al-Hazred his VII. Booke. Whatever I gette, you shal haue.
And in ye meane while, do not neglect to make use of ye Wordes I haue here giuen. I haue them Righte, but if you Desire to see
HIM, imploy the Writings on ye Piece of —— that I am
putt’g in this Packet. Saye ye Uerses every Roodmas and
Hallow’s Eue; and if yr Line runn out not, one shall bee
in yeares to come that shal looke backe and use what Saltes or Stuff for Saltes you shal leaue
him. Job XIV. XIV.
I rejoice you are again at Salem, and hope I may see you not longe hence. I have a
goode Stallion, and am think’g of get’g a Coach, there be’g one (Mr.
Merritt’s) in Prouidence already, tho’ ye Roades are
bad. If you are dispos’d to Travel, doe not pass me bye. From Boston take ye Post Rd. thro’ Dedham, Wrentham, and Attleborough, goode Taverns
be’g at all these Townes. Stop at Mr. Bolcom’s in Wrentham, where ye Beddes are finer than Mr. Hatch’s, but eate at ye other House for their Cooke is better. Turne into Prou. by Patucket
ffalls, and ye Rd. past Mr. Sayles’s Tavern. My House opp.
Mr. Epenetus Olney’s Tavern off ye  Towne Street, Ist on
ye N. side of Olney’s Court. Distance from Boston Stone abt.
XLIV Miles.
Sir, I am yr olde and true ffriend and Servt. in
Almousin-Metraton.
Josephus C.

To Mr. Simon Orne,

William’s-Lane, in Salem.
This letter, oddly enough, was what first gave Ward the exact location of
Curwen’s Providence home; for none of the records encountered up to that time had been at all
specific. The discovery was doubly striking because it indicated as the newer Curwen house built in
1761 on the site of the old, a dilapidated building still standing in Olney Court and well known to
Ward in his antiquarian rambles over Stampers’ Hill. The place was indeed only a few squares
from his own home on the great hill’s higher ground, and was now the abode of a negro family
much esteemed for occasional washing, housecleaning, and furnace-tending services. To find, in
distant Salem, such sudden proof of the significance of this familiar rookery in his own family
history, was a highly impressive thing to Ward; and he resolved to explore the place immediately
upon his return. The more mystical phases of the letter, which he took to be some extravagant kind
of symbolism, frankly baffled him; though he noted with a thrill of curiosity that the Biblical
passage referred to—Job 14, 14—was the familiar verse, “If a man die, shall he
live again? All the days of my appointed time will I wait, till my change come.”
2.
Young Ward came home in a state of pleasant excitement, and spent the following
Saturday in a long and exhaustive study of the house in Olney Court. The place, now crumbling with
age, had never been a mansion; but was a modest two-and-a-half story wooden town house of the
familiar Providence colonial type, with plain peaked roof, large central chimney, and artistically
carved doorway with rayed fanlight, triangular pediment, and trim Doric pilasters. It had suffered
but little alteration externally, and Ward felt he was gazing on something very close to the
sinister matters of his quest.
The present negro inhabitants were known to him, and he was very courteously shewn
about the interior by old Asa and his stout wife Hannah. Here there was more change than the
outside indicated, and Ward saw with regret that fully half of the fine scroll-and-urn overmantels
and shell-carved cupboard linings were gone, whilst much of the fine wainscotting and bolection
moulding was marked, hacked, and gouged, or covered up altogether with cheap wall-paper. In
general, the survey did not yield as much as Ward had somehow expected; but it was at least
exciting to stand within the ancestral walls which had housed such a man of horror as Joseph
Curwen. He saw with a thrill that a monogram had been very carefully effaced from the ancient brass
knocker.
From then until after the close of school Ward spent his time on the photostatic
copy of the Hutchinson cipher and the accumulation of local Curwen data. The former still proved
unyielding; but of the latter he obtained so much, and so many clues to similar data elsewhere,
that he was ready by July to make a trip to New London and New York to consult old letters whose
presence in those places was indicated. This trip was very fruitful, for it brought him the Fenner
letters with their terrible description of the Pawtuxet farmhouse raid, and the Nightingale-Talbot
letters in which he learned of the portrait painted on a panel of the Curwen library. This matter
of the portrait interested him particularly, since he would have given much to know just what
Joseph Curwen looked like; and he decided to make a second search of the house in Olney Court to
see if there might not be some trace of the ancient features beneath peeling coats of later paint
or layers of mouldy wall-paper.
Early in August that search took place, and Ward went carefully over the walls of
every room sizeable enough to have been by any possibility the library of the evil builder. He paid
especial attention to the large panels of such overmantels as still remained; and was keenly
excited after about an hour, when on a broad area above the fireplace in a spacious ground-floor
room he became certain that the surface brought out by the peeling of several coats of paint was
sensibly darker than any ordinary interior paint or the wood beneath it was likely to have been. A
few more careful tests with a thin knife, and he knew that he had come upon an oil portrait of
great extent. With truly scholarly restraint the youth did not risk the damage which an immediate
attempt to uncover the hidden picture with the knife might have done, but just retired from the
scene of his discovery to enlist expert help. In three days he returned with an artist of long
experience, Mr. Walter C. Dwight, whose studio is near the foot of College Hill; and that
accomplished restorer of paintings set to work at once with proper methods and chemical substances.
Old Asa and his wife were duly excited over their strange visitors, and were properly reimbursed
for this invasion of their domestic hearth.
As day by day the work of restoration progressed, Charles Ward looked on with
growing interest at the lines and shades gradually unveiled after their long oblivion. Dwight had
begun at the bottom; hence since the picture was a three-quarter-length one, the face did not come
out for some time. It was meanwhile seen that the subject was a spare, well-shaped man with
dark-blue coat, embroidered waistcoat, black satin small-clothes, and white silk stockings, seated
in a carved chair against the background of a window with wharves and ships beyond. When the head
came out it was observed to bear a neat Albemarle wig, and to possess a thin, calm, undistinguished
face which seemed somehow familiar to both Ward and the artist. Only at the very last, though, did
the restorer and his client begin to gasp with astonishment at the details of that lean, pallid
visage, and to recognise with a touch of awe the dramatic trick which heredity had played. For it
took the final bath of oil and the final stroke of the delicate scraper to bring out fully the
expression which centuries had hidden; and to confront the bewildered Charles Dexter Ward, dweller
in the past, with his own living features in the countenance of his horrible
great-great-great-grandfather.
Ward brought his parents to see the marvel he had uncovered, and his father at
once determined to purchase the picture despite its execution on stationary panelling. The
resemblance to the boy, despite an appearance of rather greater age, was marvellous; and it could
be seen that through some trick of atavism the physical contours of Joseph Curwen had found precise
duplication after a century and a half. Mrs. Ward’s resemblance to her ancestor was not at
all marked, though she could recall relatives who had some of the facial characteristics shared by
her son and by the bygone Curwen. She did not relish the discovery, and told her husband that he
had better burn the picture instead of bringing it home. There was, she averred, something
unwholesome about it; not only intrinsically, but in its very resemblance to Charles. Mr. Ward,
however, was a practical man of power and affairs—a cotton manufacturer with extensive mills
at Riverpoint in the Pawtuxet Valley—and not one to listen to feminine scruples. The picture
impressed him mightily with its likeness to his son, and he believed the boy deserved it as a
present. In this opinion, it is needless to say, Charles most heartily concurred; and a few days
later Mr. Ward located the owner of the house—a small rodent-featured person with a guttural
accent—and obtained the whole mantel and overmantel bearing the picture at a curtly fixed
priced which cut short the impending torrent of unctuous haggling.
It now remained to take off the panelling and remove it to the Ward home, where
provisions were made for its thorough restoration and installation with an electric mock-fireplace
in Charles’s third-floor study or library. To Charles was left the task of superintending
this removal, and on the twenty-eighth of August he accompanied two expert workmen from the Crooker
decorating firm to the house in Olney Court, where the mantel and portrait-bearing overmantel were
detached with great care and precision for transportation in the company’s motor truck. There
was left a space of exposed brickwork marking the chimney’s course, and in this young Ward
observed a cubical recess about a foot square, which must have lain directly behind the head of the
portrait. Curious as to what such a space might mean or contain, the youth approached and looked
within; finding beneath the deep coatings of dust and soot some loose yellowed papers, a crude,
thick copybook, and a few mouldering textile shreds which may have formed the ribbon binding the
rest together. Blowing away the bulk of the dirt and cinders, he took up the book and looked at the
bold inscription on its cover. It was in a hand which he had learned to recognise at the Essex
Institute, and proclaimed the volume as the “Journall and Notes of Jos: Curwen, Gent., of
Providence-Plantations, Late of Salem.”
Excited beyond measure by his discovery, Ward shewed the book to the two curious
workmen beside him. Their testimony is absolute as to the nature and genuineness of the finding,
and Dr. Willett relies on them to help establish his theory that the youth was not mad when he
began his major eccentricities. All the other papers were likewise in Curwen’s handwriting,
and one of them seemed especially portentous because of its inscription: “To Him Who Shal
Come After, & How He May Gett Beyonde Time & ye
Spheres.” Another was in a cipher; the same, Ward hoped, as the Hutchinson cipher which
had hitherto baffled him. A third, and here the searcher rejoiced, seemed to be a key to the
cipher; whilst the fourth and fifth were addressed respectively to “Edw: Hutchinson,
Armiger” and “Jedediah Orne, Esq.”, ‘or Their Heir or Heirs, or Those
Represent’g Them’. The sixth and last was inscribed: “Joseph Curwen his Life
and Travells Bet’n ye yeares 1678 and 1687: Of Whither He
Voyag’d, Where He Stay’d, Whom He Sawe, and What He Learnt.”
3.
We have now reached the point from which the more academic school of alienists
date Charles Ward’s madness. Upon his discovery the youth had looked immediately at a few of
the inner pages of the book and manuscripts, and had evidently seen something which impressed him
tremendously. Indeed, in shewing the titles to the workmen he appeared to guard the text itself
with peculiar care, and to labour under a perturbation for which even the antiquarian and
genealogical significance of the find could hardly account. Upon returning home he broke the news
with an almost embarrassed air, as if he wished to convey an idea of its supreme importance without
having to exhibit the evidence itself. He did not even shew the titles to his parents, but simply
told them that he had found some documents in Joseph Curwen’s handwriting, “mostly in
cipher”, which would have to be studied very carefully before yielding up their true meaning.
It is unlikely that he would have shewn what he did to the workmen, had it not been for their
unconcealed curiosity. As it was he doubtless wished to avoid any display of peculiar reticence
which would increase their discussion of the matter.
That night Charles Ward sat up in his room reading the new-found book and papers,
and when day came he did not desist. His meals, on his urgent request when his mother called to see
what was amiss, were sent up to him; and in the afternoon he appeared only briefly when the men
came to install the Curwen picture and mantelpiece in his study. The next night he slept in
snatches in his clothes, meanwhile wrestling feverishly with the unravelling of the cipher
manuscript. In the morning his mother saw that he was at work on the photostatic copy of the
Hutchinson cipher, which he had frequently shewn her before; but in response to her query he said
that the Curwen key could not be applied to it. That afternoon he abandoned his work and watched
the men fascinatedly as they finished their installation of the picture with its woodwork above a
cleverly realistic electric log, setting the mock-fireplace and overmantel a little out from the
north wall as if a chimney existed, and boxing in the sides with panelling to match the
room’s. The front panel holding the picture was sawn and hinged to allow cupboard space
behind it. After the workmen went he moved his work into the study and sat down before it with his
eyes half on the cipher and half on the portrait which stared back at him like a year-adding and
century-recalling mirror.
His parents, subsequently recalling his conduct at this period, give interesting
details anent the policy of concealment which he practiced. Before servants he seldom hid any paper
which he might be studying, since he rightly assumed that Curwen’s intricate and archaic
chirography would be too much for them. With his parents, however, he was more circumspect; and
unless the manuscript in question were a cipher, or a mere mass of cryptic symbols and unknown
ideographs (as that entitled “To Him Who Shal Come After etc.” seemed to be),
he would cover it with some convenient paper until his caller had departed. At night he kept the
papers under lock and key in an antique cabinet of his, where he also placed them whenever he left
the room. He soon resumed fairly regular hours and habits, except that his long walks and other
outside interests seemed to cease. The opening of school, where he now began his senior year,
seemed a great bore to him; and he frequently asserted his determination never to bother with
college. He had, he said, important special investigations to make, which would provide him with
more avenues toward knowledge and the humanities than any university which the world could
boast.
Naturally, only one who had always been more or less studious, eccentric, and
solitary could have pursued this course for many days without attracting notice. Ward, however, was
constitutionally a scholar and a hermit; hence his parents were less surprised than regretful at
the close confinement and secrecy he adopted. At the same time, both his father and mother thought
it odd that he would shew them no scrap of his treasure-trove, nor give any connected account of
such data as he had deciphered. This reticence he explained away as due to a wish to wait until he
might announce some connected revelation, but as the weeks passed without further disclosures there
began to grow up between the youth and his family a kind of constraint; intensified in his
mother’s case by her manifest disapproval of all Curwen delvings.
During October Ward began visiting the libraries again, but no longer for the
antiquarian matter of his former days. Witchcraft and magic, occultism and daemonology, were what
he sought now; and when Providence sources proved unfruitful he would take the train for Boston and
tap the wealth of the great library in Copley Square, the Widener Library at Harvard, or the Zion
Research Library in Brookline, where certain rare works on Biblical subjects are available. He
bought extensively, and fitted up a whole additional set of shelves in his study for newly acquired
works on uncanny subjects; while during the Christmas holidays he made a round of out-of-town trips
including one to Salem to consult certain records at the Essex Institute.
About the middle of January, 1920, there entered Ward’s bearing an element
of triumph which he did not explain, and he was no more found at work upon the Hutchinson cipher.
Instead, he inaugurated a dual policy of chemical research and record-scanning; fitting up for the
one a laboratory in the unused attic of the house, and for the latter haunting all the sources of
vital statistics in Providence. Local dealers in drugs and scientific supplies, later questioned,
gave astonishingly queer and meaningless catalogues of the substances and instruments he purchased;
but clerks at the State House, the City Hall, and the various libraries agree as to the definite
object of his second interest. He was searching intensely and feverishly for the grave of Joseph
Curwen, from whose slate slab an older generation had so wisely blotted the name.
Little by little there grew upon the Ward family the conviction that something was
wrong. Charles had had freaks and changes of minor interests before, but this growing secrecy and
absorption in strange pursuits was unlike even him. His school work was the merest pretence; and
although he failed in no test, it could be seen that the old application had all vanished. He had
other concernments now; and when not in his new laboratory with a score of obsolete alchemical
books, could be found either poring over old burial records down town or glued to his volumes of
occult lore in his study, where the startlingly—one almost fancied increasingly—similar
features of Joseph Curwen stared blandly at him from the great overmantel on the north wall.
Late in March Ward added to his archive-searching a ghoulish series of rambles
about the various ancient cemeteries of the city. The cause appeared later, when it was learned
from City Hall clerks that he had probably found an important clue. His quest had suddenly shifted
from the grave of Joseph Curwen to that of one Naphthali Field; and this shift was explained when,
upon going over the files that he had been over, the investigators actually found a fragmentary
record of Curwen’s burial which had escaped the general obliteration, and which stated that
the curious leaden coffin had been interred “10 ft. S. and 5 ft. W. of Naphthali
Field’s grave in ye—”. The lack of a specified
burying-ground in the surviving entry greatly complicated the search, and Naphthali Field’s
grave seemed as elusive as that of Curwen; but here no systematic effacement had existed, and one
might reasonably be expected to stumble on the stone itself even if its record had perished. Hence
the rambles—from which St. John’s (the former King’s) Churchyard and the ancient
Congregational burying-ground in the midst of Swan Point Cemetery were excluded, since other
statistics had shewn that the only Naphthali Field (obiit 1729) whose grave could have been meant
had been a Baptist.
4.
It was toward May when Dr. Willett, at the request of the senior Ward, and
fortified with all the Curwen data which the family had gleaned from Charles in his non-secretive
days, talked with the young man. The interview was of little value or conclusiveness, for Willett
felt at every moment that Charles was thoroughly master of himself and in touch with matters of
real importance; but it at least forced the secretive youth to offer some rational explanation of
his recent demeanour. Of a pallid, impassive type not easily shewing embarrassment, Ward seemed
quite ready to discuss his pursuits, though not to reveal their object. He stated that the papers
of his ancestor had contained some remarkable secrets of early scientific knowledge, for the most
part in cipher, of an apparent scope comparable only to the discoveries of Friar Bacon and perhaps
surpassing even those. They were, however, meaningless except when correlated with a body of
learning now wholly obsolete; so that their immediate presentation to a world equipped only with
modern science would rob them of all impressiveness and dramatic significance. To take their vivid
place in the history of human thought they must first be correlated by one familiar with the
background out of which they evolved, and to this task of correlation Ward was now devoting
himself. He was seeking to acquire as fast as possible those neglected arts of old which a true
interpreter of the Curwen data must possess, and hoped in time to make a full announcement and
presentation of the utmost interest to mankind and to the world of thought. Not even Einstein, he
declared, could more profoundly revolutionise the current conception of things.
As to his graveyard search, whose object he freely admitted, but the details of
whose progress he did not relate, he said he had reason to think that Joseph Curwen’s
mutilated headstone bore certain mystic symbols—carved from directions in his will and
ignorantly spared by those who had effaced the name—which were absolutely essential to the
final solution of his cryptic system. Curwen, he believed, had wished to guard his secret with
care; and had consequently distributed the data in an exceedingly curious fashion. When Dr. Willett
asked to see the mystic documents, Ward displayed much reluctance and tried to put him off with
such things as photostatic copies of the Hutchinson cipher and Orne formulae and diagrams; but
finally shewed him the exteriors of some of the real Curwen finds—the “Journall and
Notes”, the cipher (title in cipher also), and the formula-filled message “To
Him Who Shal Come After”—and let him glance inside such as were in obscure
characters.
He also opened the diary at a page carefully selected for its innocuousness and
gave Willett a glimpse of Curwen’s connected handwriting in English. The doctor noted very
closely the crabbed and complicated letters, and the general aura of the seventeenth century which
clung round both penmanship and style despite the writer’s survival into the eighteenth
century, and became quickly certain that the document was genuine. The text itself was relatively
trivial, and Willett recalled only a fragment:
“Wedn. 16 Octr. 1754. My Sloope the Wakeful this Day putt in from London
with XX newe Men pick’d up in ye Indies, Spaniards from
Martineco and 2 Dutch Men from Surinam. Ye Dutch Men are like to
Desert from have’g hearde Somewhat ill of these Ventures, but I will see to ye Inducing of them to Staye. ffor Mr. Knight Dexter of ye Boy and Book 120 Pieces Camblets, 100 Pieces Assrtd. Cambleteens, 20
Pieces blue Duffles, 100 Pieces Shalloons, 50 Pieces Calamancoes, 300 Pieces each, Shendsoy and
Humhums. ffor Mr. Green at ye Elephant 50 Gallon Cyttles, 20
Warm’g Pannes, 15 Bake Cyttles, 10 pr. Smoke’g Tonges. ffor Mr. Perrigo 1 Sett of
Awles, ffor Mr. Nightingale 50 Reames prime Foolscap. Say’d ye SABAOTH thrice last Nighte but None appear’d. I must heare more
from Mr. H. in Transylvania, tho’ it is Harde reach’g him and exceeding strange he can
not give me the Use of what he hath so well us’d these hundred yeares. Simon hath not Writ
these V. Weekes, but I expecte soon hear’g from him.”
When upon reaching this point Dr. Willett turned the leaf he was quickly checked
by Ward, who almost snatched the book from his grasp. All that the doctor had a chance to see on
the newly opened page was a brief pair of sentences; but these, strangely enough, lingered
tenaciously in his memory. They ran: “Ye Verse from Liber-Damnatus be’g spoke V
Roodmasses and IV Hallows-Eves, I am Hopeful ye Thing is
breed’g Outside ye Spheres. It will drawe One who is to
Come, if I can make sure he shal bee, and he shall think on Past thinges and look back thro’
all ye yeares, against ye which I
must have ready ye Saltes or That to make ’em
with.”
Willett saw no more, but somehow this small glimpse gave a new and vague terror to
the painted features of Joseph Curwen which stared blandly down from the overmantel. Ever after
that he entertained the odd fancy—which his medical skill of course assured him was only a
fancy—that the eyes of the portrait had a sort of wish, if not an actual tendency, to follow
young Charles Ward as he moved about the room. He stopped before leaving to study the picture
closely, marvelling at its resemblance to Charles and memorising every minute detail of the
cryptical, colourless face, even down to a slight scar or pit in the smooth brow above the right
eye. Cosmo Alexander, he decided, was a painter worthy of the Scotland that produced Raeburn, and a
teacher worthy of his illustrious pupil Gilbert Stuart.
Assured by the doctor that Charles’s mental health was in no danger, but
that on the other hand he was engaged in researches which might prove of real importance, the Wards
were more lenient than they might otherwise have been when during the following June the youth made
positive his refusal to attend college. He had, he declared, studies of much more vital importance
to pursue; and intimated a wish to go abroad the following year in order to avail himself of
certain sources of data not existing in America. The senior Ward, while denying this latter wish as
absurd for a boy of only eighteen, acquiesced regarding the university; so that after a none too
brilliant graduation from the Moses Brown School there ensued for Charles a three-year period of
intensive occult study and graveyard searching. He became recognised as an eccentric, and dropped
even more completely from the sight of his family’s friends than he had been before; keeping
close to his work and only occasionally making trips to other cities to consult obscure records.
Once he went south to talk with a strange old mulatto who dwelt in a swamp and about whom a
newspaper had printed a curious article. Again he sought a small village in the Adirondacks whence
reports of certain odd ceremonial practices had come. But still his parents forbade him the trip to
the Old World which he desired.
Coming of age in April, 1923, and having previously inherited a small competence
from his maternal grandfather, Ward determined at last to take the European trip hitherto denied
him. Of his proposed itinerary he would say nothing save that the needs of his studies would carry
him to many places, but he promised to write his parents fully and faithfully. When they saw he
could not be dissuaded, they ceased all opposition and helped as best they could; so that in June
the young man sailed for Liverpool with the farewell blessings of his father and mother, who
accompanied him to Boston and waved him out of sight from the White Star pier in Charlestown.
Letters soon told of his safe arrival, and of his securing good quarters in Great Russell Street,
London; where he proposed to stay, shunning all family friends, till he had exhausted the resources
of the British Museum in a certain direction. Of his daily life he wrote but little, for there was
little to write. Study and experiment consumed all his time, and he mentioned a laboratory which he
had established in one of his rooms. That he said nothing of antiquarian rambles in the glamorous
old city with its luring skyline of ancient domes and steeples and its tangles of roads and alleys
whose mystic convolutions and sudden vistas alternately beckon and surprise, was taken by his
parents as a good index of the degree to which his new interests had engrossed his mind.
In June, 1924, a brief note told of his departure for Paris, to which he had
before made one or two flying trips for material in the Bibliothèque Nationale. For three months
thereafter he sent only postal cards, giving an address in the Rue St. Jacques and referring to a
special search among rare manuscripts in the library of an unnamed private collector. He avoided
acquaintances, and no tourists brought back reports of having seen him. Then came a silence, and in
October the Wards received a picture card from Prague, Czecho-Slovakia, stating that Charles was in
that ancient town for the purpose of conferring with a certain very aged man supposed to be the
last living possessor of some very curious mediaeval information. He gave an address in the
Neustadt, and announced no move till the following January; when he dropped several cards from
Vienna telling of his passage through that city on the way toward a more easterly region whither
one of his correspondents and fellow-delvers into the occult had invited him.
The next card was from Klausenburg in Transylvania, and told of Ward’s
progress toward his destination. He was going to visit a Baron Ferenczy, whose estate lay in the
mountains east of Rakus; and was to be addressed at Rakus in the care of that nobleman. Another
card from Rakus a week later, saying that his host’s carriage had met him and that he was
leaving the village for the mountains, was his last message for a considerable time; indeed, he did
not reply to his parents’ frequent letters until May, when he wrote to discourage the plan of
his mother for a meeting in London, Paris, or Rome during the summer, when the elder Wards were
planning to travel in Europe. His researches, he said, were such that he could not leave his
present quarters; while the situation of Baron Ferenczy’s castle did not favour visits. It
was on a crag in the dark wooded mountains, and the region was so shunned by the country folk that
normal people could not help feeling ill at ease. Moreover, the Baron was not a person likely to
appeal to correct and conservative New England gentlefolk. His aspect and manners had
idiosyncrasies, and his age was so great as to be disquieting. It would be better, Charles said, if
his parents would wait for his return to Providence; which could scarcely be far distant.
That return did not, however, take place until May, 1926, when after a few
heralding cards the young wanderer quietly slipped into New York on the Homeric and
traversed the long miles to Providence by motor-coach, eagerly drinking in the green rolling hills,
the fragrant, blossoming orchards, and the white steepled towns of vernal Connecticut; his first
taste of ancient New England in nearly four years. When the coach crossed the Pawcatuck and entered
Rhode Island amidst the faery goldenness of a late spring afternoon his heart beat with quickened
force, and the entry to Providence along Reservoir and Elmwood avenues was a breathless and
wonderful thing despite the depths of forbidden lore to which he had delved. At the high square
where Broad, Weybosset, and Empire Streets join, he saw before and below him in the fire of sunset
the pleasant, remembered houses and domes and steeples of the old town; and his head swam curiously
as the vehicle rolled down the terminal behind the Biltmore, bringing into view the great dome and
soft, roof-pierced greenery of the ancient hill across the river, and the tall colonial spire of
the First Baptist Church limned pink in the magic evening light against the fresh springtime
verdure of its precipitous background.
Old Providence! It was this place and the mysterious forces of its long,
continuous history which had brought him into being, and which had drawn him back toward marvels
and secrets whose boundaries no prophet might fix. Here lay the arcana, wondrous or dreadful as the
case might be, for which all his years of travel and application had been preparing him. A taxicab
whirled him through Post Office Square with its glimpse of the river, the old Market House, and the
head of the bay, and up the steep curved slope of Waterman Street to Prospect, where the vast
gleaming dome and sunset-flushed Ionic columns of the Christian Science Church beckoned northward.
Then eight squares past the fine old estates his childish eyes had known, and the quaint brick
sidewalks so often trodden by his youthful feet. And at last the little white overtaken farmhouse
on the right, on the left the classic Adam porch and stately bayed facade of the great brick house
where he was born. It was twilight, and Charles Dexter Ward had come home.
5.
A school of alienists slightly less academic than Dr. Lyman’s assign to
Ward’s European trip the beginning of his true madness. Admitting that he was sane when he
started, they believe that his conduct upon returning implies a disastrous change. But even to this
claim Dr. Willett refuses to accede. There was, he insists, something later; and the queernesses of
the youth at this stage he attributes to the practice of rituals learned abroad—odd enough
things, to be sure, but by no means implying mental aberration on the part of their celebrant. Ward
himself, though visibly aged and hardened, was still normal in his general reactions; and in
several talks with Willett displayed a balance which no madman—even an incipient
one—could feign continuously for long. What elicited the notion of insanity at this period
were the sounds heard at all hours from Ward’s attic laboratory, in which he kept
himself most of the time. There were chantings and repetitions, and thunderous declamations in
uncanny rhythms; and although these sounds were always in Ward’s own voice, there was
something in the quality of that voice, and in the accents of the formulae it pronounced, which
could not but chill the blood of every hearer. It was noticed that Nig, the venerable and beloved
black cat of the household, bristled and arched his back perceptibly when certain of the tones were
heard.
The odours occasionally wafted from the laboratory were likewise exceedingly
strange. Sometimes they were very noxious, but more often they were aromatic, with a haunting,
elusive quality which seemed to have the power of inducing fantastic images. People who smelled
them had a tendency to glimpse momentary mirages of enormous vistas, with strange hills or endless
avenues of sphinxes and hippogriffs stretching off into infinite distance. Ward did not resume his
old-time rambles, but applied himself diligently to the strange books he had brought home, and to
equally strange delvings within his quarters; explaining that European sources had greatly enlarged
the possibilities of his work, and promising great revelations in the years to come. His older
aspect increased to a startling degree his resemblance to the Curwen portrait in his library; and
Dr. Willett would often pause by the latter after a call, marvelling at the virtual identity, and
reflecting that only the small pit above the picture’s right eye now remained to
differentiate the long-dead wizard from the living youth. These calls of Willett’s,
undertaken at the request of the senior Wards, were curious affairs. Ward at no time repulsed the
doctor, but the latter saw that he could never reach the young man’s inner psychology.
Frequently he noted peculiar things about; little wax images of grotesque design on the shelves or
tables, and the half-erased remnants of circles, triangles, and pentagrams in chalk or charcoal on
the cleared central space of the large room. And always in the night those rhythms and incantations
thundered, till it became very difficult to keep servants or suppress furtive talk of
Charles’s madness.
In January, 1927, a peculiar incident occurred. One night about midnight, as
Charles was chanting a ritual whose weird cadence echoed unpleasantly through the house below,
there came a sudden gust of chill wind from the bay, and a faint, obscure trembling of the earth
which everyone in the neighbourhood noted. At the same time the cat exhibited phenomenal traces of
fright, while dogs bayed for as much as a mile around. This was the prelude to a sharp
thunderstorm, anomalous for the season, which brought with it such a crash that Mr. and Mrs. Ward
believed the house had been struck. They rushed upstairs to see what damage had been done, but
Charles met them at the door to the attic; pale, resolute, and portentous, with an almost fearsome
combination of triumph and seriousness on his face. He assured them that the house had not really
been struck, and that the storm would soon be over. They paused, and looking through a window saw
that he was indeed right; for the lightning flashed farther and farther off, whilst the trees
ceased to bend in the strange frigid gust from the water. The thunder sank to a sort of dull
mumbling chuckle and finally died away. Stars came out, and the stamp of triumph on Charles
Ward’s face crystallised into a very singular expression.
For two months or more after this incident Ward was less confined than usual to
his laboratory. He exhibited a curious interest in the weather, and made odd inquiries about the
date of the spring thawing of the ground. One night late in March he left the house after midnight,
and did not return till almost morning; when his mother, being wakeful, heard a rumbling motor draw
up to the carriage entrance. Muffled oaths could be distinguished, and Mrs. Ward, rising and going
to the window, saw four dark figures removing a long, heavy box from a truck at Charles’s
direction and carrying it within by the side door. She heard laboured breathing and ponderous
footfalls on the stairs, and finally a dull thumping in the attic; after which the footfalls
descended again, and the four men reappeared outside and drove off in their truck.
The next day Charles resumed his strict attic seclusion, drawing down the dark
shades of his laboratory windows and appearing to be working on some metal substance. He would open
the door to no one, and steadfastly refused all proffered food. About noon a wrenching sound
followed by a terrible cry and a fall were heard, but when Mrs. Ward rapped at the door her son at
length answered faintly, and told her that nothing had gone amiss. The hideous and indescribable
stench now welling out was absolutely harmless and unfortunately necessary. Solitude was the one
prime essential, and he would appear later for dinner. That afternoon, after the conclusion of some
odd hissing sounds which came from behind the locked portal, he did finally appear; wearing an
extremely haggard aspect and forbidding anyone to enter the laboratory upon any pretext. This,
indeed, proved the beginning of a new policy of secrecy; for never afterward was any other person
permitted to visit either the mysterious garret workroom or the adjacent storeroom which he cleaned
out, furnished roughly, and added to his inviolably private domain as a sleeping apartment. Here he
lived, with books brought up from his library beneath, till the time he purchased the Pawtuxet
bungalow and moved to it all his scientific effects.
In the evening Charles secured the paper before the rest of the family and damaged
part of it through an apparent accident. Later on Dr. Willett, having fixed the date from
statements by various members of the household, looked up an intact copy at the Journal
office and found that in the destroyed section the following small item had occurred:
Nocturnal Diggers Surprised inNorth Burial Ground

Robert Hart, night watchman at the North Burial Ground, this morning discovered a party of several
men with a motor truck in the oldest part of the cemetery, but apparently frightened them off
before they had accomplished whatever their object may have been.
The discovery took place at about four o’clock, when Hart’s attention
was attracted by the sound of a motor outside his shelter. Investigating, he saw a large truck on
the main drive several rods away; but could not reach it before the sound of his feet on the gravel
had revealed his approach. The men hastily placed a large box in the truck and drove away toward
the street before they could be overtaken; and since no known grave was disturbed, Hart believes
that this box was an object which they wished to bury.
The diggers must have been at work for a long while before detection, for Hart
found an enormous hole dug at a considerable distance back from the roadway in the lot of Amasa
Field, where most of the old stones have long ago disappeared. The hole, a place as large and deep
as a grave, was empty; and did not coincide with any interment mentioned in the cemetery
records.
Sergt. Riley of the Second Station viewed the spot and gave the opinion that the
hole was dug by bootleggers rather gruesomely and ingeniously seeking a safe cache for liquor in a
place not likely to be disturbed. In reply to questions Hart said he thought the escaping truck had
headed up Rochambeau Avenue, though he could not be sure.
During the next few days Ward was seldom seen by his family. Having added sleeping
quarters to his attic realm, he kept closely to himself there, ordering food brought to the door
and not taking it in until after the servant had gone away. The droning of monotonous formulae and
the chanting of bizarre rhythms recurred at intervals, while at other times occasional listeners
could detect the sound of tinkling glass, hissing chemicals, running water, or roaring gas flames.
Odours of the most unplaceable quality, wholly unlike any before noted, hung at times around the
door; and the air of tension observable in the young recluse whenever he did venture briefly forth
was such as to excite the keenest speculation. Once he made a hasty trip to the Athenaeum for a
book he required, and again he hired a messenger to fetch him a highly obscure volume from Boston.
Suspense was written portentously over the whole situation, and both the family and Dr. Willett
confessed themselves wholly at a loss what to do or think about it.
6.
Then on the fifteenth of April a strange development occurred. While nothing
appeared to grow different in kind, there was certainly a very terrible difference in degree; and
Dr. Willett somehow attaches great significance to the change. The day was Good Friday, a
circumstance of which the servants made much, but which others quite naturally dismiss as an
irrelevant coincidence. Late in the afternoon young Ward began repeating a certain formula in a
singularly loud voice, at the same time burning some substance so pungent that its fumes escaped
over the entire house. The formula was so plainly audible in the hall outside the locked door that
Mrs. Ward could not help memorising it as she waited and listened anxiously, and later on she was
able to write it down at Dr. Willett’s request. It ran as follows, and experts have told Dr.
Willett that its very close analogue can be found in the mystic writings of “Eliphas
Levi”, that cryptic soul who crept through a crack in the forbidden door and glimpsed the
frightful vistas of the void beyond:
“Per Adonai Eloim, Adonai Jehova,
Adonai Sabaoth, Metraton On Agla Mathon,
verbum pythonicum, mysterium salamandrae,
conventus sylvorum, antra gnomorum,
daemonia Coeli Gad, Almousin, Gibor, Jehosua,
Evam, Zariatnatmik, veni, veni, veni.”
This had been going on for two hours without change or intermission when over all
the neighbourhood a pandaemoniac howling of dogs set in. The extent of this howling can be judged
from the space it received in the papers the next day, but to those in the Ward household it was
overshadowed by the odour which instantly followed it; a hideous, all-pervasive odour which none of
them had ever smelt before or have ever smelt since. In the midst of this mephitic flood there came
a very perceptible flash like that of lightning, which would have been blinding and impressive but
for the daylight around; and then was heard the voice that no listener can ever forget
because of its thunderous remoteness, its incredible depth, and its eldritch dissimilarity to
Charles Ward’s voice. It shook the house, and was clearly heard by at least two neighbours
above the howling of the dogs. Mrs. Ward, who had been listening in despair outside her son’s
locked laboratory, shivered as she recognised its hellish import; for Charles had told her of its
evil fame in dark books, and of the manner in which it had thundered, according to the Fenner
letters, above the doomed Pawtuxet farmhouse on the night of Joseph Curwen’s annihilation.
There was no mistaking that nightmare phrase, for Charles had described it too vividly in the old
days when he had talked frankly of his Curwen investigations. And yet it was only this fragment of
an archaic and forgotten language: “DIES MIES JESCHET BOENE DOESEF DOUVEMA
ENITEMAUS”.
Close upon this thundering there came a momentary darkening of the daylight,
though sunset was still an hour distant, and then a puff of added odour different from the first
but equally unknown and intolerable. Charles was chanting again now and his mother could hear
syllables that sounded like “Yi-nash-Yog-Sothoth-he-lgeb-fi-throdog”—ending in a
“Yah!” whose maniacal force mounted in an ear-splitting crescendo. A second later all
previous memories were effaced by the wailing scream which burst out with frantic explosiveness and
gradually changed form to a paroxysm of diabolic and hysterical laughter. Mrs. Ward, with the
mingled fear and blind courage of maternity, advanced and knocked affrightedly at the concealing
panels, but obtained no sign of recognition. She knocked again, but paused nervelessly as a second
shriek arose, this one unmistakably in the familiar voice of her son, and sounding concurrently
with the still bursting cachinnations of that other voice. Presently she fainted, although she
is still unable to recall the precise and immediate cause. Memory sometimes makes merciful
deletions.
Mr. Ward returned from the business section at about quarter past six; and not
finding his wife downstairs, was told by the frightened servants that she was probably watching at
Charles’s door, from which the sounds had been far stranger than ever before. Mounting the
stairs at once, he saw Mrs. Ward stretched at full length on the floor of the corridor outside the
laboratory; and realising that she had fainted, hastened to fetch a glass of water from a set bowl
in a neighbouring alcove. Dashing the cold fluid in her face, he was heartened to observe an
immediate response on her part, and was watching the bewildered opening of her eyes when a chill
shot through him and threatened to reduce him to the very state from which she was emerging. For
the seemingly silent laboratory was not as silent as it had appeared to be, but held the murmurs of
a tense, muffled conversation in tones too low for comprehension, yet of a quality profoundly
disturbing to the soul.
It was not, of course, new for Charles to mutter formulae; but this muttering was
definitely different. It was so palpably a dialogue, or imitation of a dialogue, with the regular
alteration of inflections suggesting question and answer, statement and response. One voice was
undisguisedly that of Charles, but the other had a depth and hollowness which the youth’s
best powers of ceremonial mimicry had scarcely approached before. There was something hideous,
blasphemous, and abnormal about it, and but for a cry from his recovering wife which cleared his
mind by arousing his protective instincts it is not likely that Theodore Howland Ward could have
maintained for nearly a year more his old boast that he had never fainted. As it was, he seized his
wife in his arms and bore her quickly downstairs before she could notice the voices which had so
horribly disturbed him. Even so, however, he was not quick enough to escape catching something
himself which caused him to stagger dangerously with his burden. For Mrs. Ward’s cry had
evidently been heard by others than he, and there had come from behind the locked door the first
distinguishable words which that masked and terrible colloquy had yielded. They were merely an
excited caution in Charles’s own voice, but somehow their implications held a nameless fright
for the father who overheard them. The phrase was just this:
“Sshh!—write!”
Mr. and Mrs. Ward conferred at some length after dinner, and the former resolved
to have a firm and serious talk with Charles that very night. No matter how important the object,
such conduct could no longer be permitted; for these latest developments transcended every limit of
sanity and formed a menace to the order and nervous well-being of the entire household. The youth
must indeed have taken complete leave of his senses, since only downright madness could have
prompted the wild screams and imaginary conversations in assumed voices which the present day had
brought forth. All this must be stopped, or Mrs. Ward would be made ill and the keeping of servants
become an impossibility.
Mr. Ward rose at the close of the meal and started upstairs for Charles’s
laboratory. On the third floor, however, he paused at the sounds which he heard proceeding from the
now disused library of his son. Books were apparently being flung about and papers wildly rustled,
and upon stepping to the door Mr. Ward beheld the youth within, excitedly assembling a vast armful
of literary matter of every size and shape. Charles’s aspect was very drawn and haggard, and
he dropped his entire load with a start at the sound of his father’s voice. At the elder
man’s command he sat down, and for some time listened to the admonitions he had so long
deserved. There was no scene. At the end of the lecture he agreed that his father was right, and
that his noises, mutterings, incantations, and chemical odours were indeed inexcusable nuisances.
He agreed to a policy of greater quiet, though insisting on a prolongation of his extreme privacy.
Much of his future work, he said, was in any case purely book research; and he could obtain
quarters elsewhere for any such vocal rituals as might be necessary at a later stage. For the
fright and fainting of his mother he expressed the keenest contrition, and explained that the
conversation later heard was part of an elaborate symbolism designed to create a certain mental
atmosphere. His use of abstruse technical terms somewhat bewildered Mr. Ward, but the parting
impression was one of undeniable sanity and poise despite a mysterious tension of the utmost
gravity. The interview was really quite inconclusive, and as Charles picked up his armful and left
the room Mr. Ward hardly knew what to make of the entire business. It was as mysterious as the
death of poor old Nig, whose stiffening form had been found an hour before in the basement, with
staring eyes and fear-distorted mouth.
Driven by some vague detective instinct, the bewildered parent now glanced
curiously at the vacant shelves to see what his son had taken up to the attic. The youth’s
library was plainly and rigidly classified, so that one might tell at a glance the books or at
least the kind of books which had been withdrawn. On this occasion Mr. Ward was astonished to find
that nothing of the occult or the antiquarian, beyond what had been previously removed, was
missing. These new withdrawals were all modern items; histories, scientific treatises, geographies,
manuals of literature, philosophic works, and certain contemporary newspapers and magazines. It was
a very curious shift from Charles Ward’s recent run of reading, and the father paused in a
growing vortex of perplexity and an engulfing sense of strangeness. The strangeness was a very
poignant sensation, and almost clawed at his chest as he strove to see just what was wrong around
him. Something was indeed wrong, and tangibly as well as spiritually so. Ever since he had been in
this room he had known that something was amiss, and at last it dawned upon him what it was.
On the north wall rose still the ancient carved overmantel from the house in Olney
Court, but to the cracked and precariously restored oils of the large Curwen portrait disaster had
come. Time and unequal heating had done their work at last, and at some time since the room’s
last cleaning the worst had happened. Peeling clear of the wood, curling tighter and tighter, and
finally crumbling into small bits with what must have been malignly silent suddenness, the portrait
of Joseph Curwen had resigned forever its staring surveillance of the youth it so strangely
resembled, and now lay scattered on the floor as a thin coating of fine bluish-grey dust.
IV. A Mutation and a Madness1.

In the week following that memorable Good Friday Charles Ward was seen more often than usual, and
was continually carrying books between his library and the attic laboratory. His actions were quiet
and rational, but he had a furtive, hunted look which his mother did not like, and developed an
incredibly ravenous appetite as gauged by his demands upon the cook. Dr. Willett had been told of
those Friday noises and happenings, and on the following Tuesday had a long conversation with the
youth in the library where the picture stared no more. The interview was, as always, inconclusive;
but Willett is still ready to swear that the youth was sane and himself at the time. He held out
promises of an early revelation, and spoke of the need of securing a laboratory elsewhere. At the
loss of the portrait he grieved singularly little considering his first enthusiasm over it, but
seemed to find something of positive humour in its sudden crumbling.
About the second week Charles began to be absent from the house for long periods,
and one day when good old black Hannah came to help with the spring cleaning she mentioned his
frequent visits to the old house in Olney Court, where he would come with a large valise and
perform curious delvings in the cellar. He was always very liberal to her and to old Asa, but
seemed more worried than he used to be; which grieved her very much, since she had watched him grow
up from birth. Another report of his doings came from Pawtuxet, where some friends of the family
saw him at a distance a surprising number of times. He seemed to haunt the resort and canoe-house
of Rhodes-on-the-Pawtuxet, and subsequent inquiries by Dr. Willett at that place brought out the
fact that his purpose was always to secure access to the rather hedged-in river-bank, along which
he would walk toward the north, usually not reappearing for a very long while.
Late in May came a momentary revival of ritualistic sounds in the attic laboratory
which brought a stern reproof from Mr. Ward and a somewhat distracted promise of amendment from
Charles. It occurred one morning, and seemed to form a resumption of the imaginary conversation
noted on that turbulent Good Friday. The youth was arguing or remonstrating hotly with himself, for
there suddenly burst forth a perfectly distinguishable series of clashing shouts in differentiated
tones like alternate demands and denials which caused Mrs. Ward to run upstairs and listen at the
door. She could hear no more than a fragment whose only plain words were “must have it red
for three months”, and upon her knocking all sounds ceased at once. When Charles was later
questioned by his father he said that there were certain conflicts of spheres of consciousness
which only great skill could avoid, but which he would try to transfer to other realms.
About the middle of June a queer nocturnal incident occurred. In the early evening
there had been some noise and thumping in the laboratory upstairs, and Mr. Ward was on the point of
investigating when it suddenly quieted down. That midnight, after the family had retired, the
butler was nightlocking the front door when according to his statement Charles appeared somewhat
blunderingly and uncertainly at the foot of the stairs with a large suitcase and made signs that he
wished egress. The youth spoke no word, but the worthy Yorkshireman caught one sight of his fevered
eyes and trembled causelessly. He opened the door and young Ward went out, but in the morning he
presented his resignation to Mrs. Ward. There was, he said, something unholy in the glance Charles
had fixed on him. It was no way for a young gentleman to look at an honest person, and he could not
possibly stay another night. Mrs. Ward allowed the man to depart, but she did not value his
statement highly. To fancy Charles in a savage state that night was quite ridiculous, for as long
as she had remained awake she had heard faint sounds from the laboratory above; sounds as if of
sobbing and pacing, and of a sighing which told only of despair’s profoundest depths. Mrs.
Ward had grown used to listening for sounds in the night, for the mystery of her son was fast
driving all else from her mind.
The next evening, much as on another evening nearly three months before, Charles
Ward seized the newspaper very early and accidentally lost the main section. The matter was not
recalled till later, when Dr. Willett began checking up loose ends and searching out missing links
here and there. In the Journal office he found the section which Charles had lost, and
marked two items as of possible significance. They were as follows:
More Cemetery Delving

It was this morning discovered by Robert Hart, night watchman at the North Burial Ground, that
ghouls were again at work in the ancient portion of the cemetery. The grave of Ezra Weeden, who was
born in 1740 and died in 1824, according to his uprooted and savagely splintered slate headstone,
was found excavated and rifled, the work being evidently done with a spade stolen from an adjacent
tool-shed.
Whatever the contents may have been after more than a century of burial, all was
gone except a few slivers of decayed wood. There were no wheel tracks, but the police have measured
a single set of footprints which they found in the vicinity, and which indicate the boots of a man
of refinement.
Hart is inclined to link this incident with the digging discovered last March,
when a party in a motor truck were frightened away after making a deep excavation; but Sergt. Riley
of the Second Station discounts this theory and points to vital differences in the two cases. In
March the digging had been in a spot where no grave was known; but this time a well-marked and
cared-for grave had been rifled with every evidence of deliberate purpose, and with a conscious
malignity expressed in the splintering of the slab which had been intact up to the day
before.
Members of the Weeden family, notified of the happening, expressed their
astonishment and regret; and were wholly unable to think of any enemy who would care to violate the
grave of their ancestor. Hazard Weeden of 598 Angell Street recalls a family legend according to
which Ezra Weeden was involved in some very peculiar circumstances, not dishonourable to himself,
shortly before the Revolution; but of any modern feud or mystery he is frankly ignorant. Inspector
Cunningham has been assigned to the case, and hopes to uncover some valuable clues in the near
future.
Dogs Noisy in Pawtuxet
Residents of Pawtuxet were aroused about 3 a.m. today by a phenomenal baying of
dogs which seemed to centre near the river just north of Rhodes-on-the-Pawtuxet. The volume and
quality of the howling were unusually odd, according to most who heard it; and Fred Lemdin, night
watchman at Rhodes, declares it was mixed with something very like the shrieks of a man in mortal
terror and agony. A sharp and very brief thunderstorm, which seemed to strike somewhere near the
bank of the river, put an end to the disturbance. Strange and unpleasant odours, probably from the
oil tanks along the bay, are popularly linked with this incident; and may have had their share in
exciting the dogs.

The aspect of Charles now became very haggard and hunted, and all agreed in
retrospect that he may have wished at this period to make some statement or confession from which
sheer terror withheld him. The morbid listening of his mother in the night brought out the fact
that he made frequent sallies abroad under cover of darkness, and most of the more academic
alienists unite at present in charging him with the revolting cases of vampirism which the press so
sensationally reported about this time, but which have not yet been definitely traced to any known
perpetrator. These cases, too recent and celebrated to need detailed mention, involved victims of
every age and type and seemed to cluster around two distinct localities; the residential hill and
the North End, near the Ward home, and the suburban districts across the Cranston line near
Pawtuxet. Both late wayfarers and sleepers with open windows were attacked, and those who lived to
tell the tale spoke unanimously of a lean, lithe, leaping monster with burning eyes which fastened
its teeth in the throat or upper arm and feasted ravenously.
Dr. Willett, who refuses to date the madness of Charles Ward as far back as even
this, is cautious in attempting to explain these horrors. He has, he declares, certain theories of
his own; and limits his positive statements to a peculiar kind of negation. “I will
not,” he says, “state who or what I believe perpetrated these attacks and murders, but
I will declare that Charles Ward was innocent of them. I have reason to be sure he was ignorant of
the taste of blood, as indeed his continued anaemic decline and increasing pallor prove better than
any verbal argument. Ward meddled with terrible things, but he has paid for it, and he was never a
monster or a villain. As for now—I don’t like to think. A change came, and I’m
content to believe that the old Charles Ward died with it. His soul did, anyhow, for that mad flesh
that vanished from Waite’s hospital had another.”
Willett speaks with authority, for he was often at the Ward home attending Mrs.
Ward, whose nerves had begun to snap under the strain. Her nocturnal listening had bred some morbid
hallucinations which she confided to the doctor with hesitancy, and which he ridiculed in talking
to her, although they made him ponder deeply when alone. These delusions always concerned the faint
sounds which she fancied she heard in the attic laboratory and bedroom, and emphasised the
occurrence of muffled sighs and sobbings at the most impossible times. Early in July Willett
ordered Mrs. Ward to Atlantic City for an indefinite recuperative sojourn, and cautioned both Mr.
Ward and the haggard and elusive Charles to write her only cheering letters. It is probably to this
enforced and reluctant escape that she owes her life and continued sanity.
2.
Not long after his mother’s departure Charles Ward began negotiating for the
Pawtuxet bungalow. It was a squalid little wooden edifice with a concrete garage, perched high on
the sparsely settled bank of the river slightly above Rhodes, but for some odd reason the youth
would have nothing else. He gave the real-estate agencies no peace till one of them secured it for
him at an exorbitant price from a somewhat reluctant owner, and as soon as it was vacant he took
possession under cover of darkness, transporting in a great closed van the entire contents of his
attic laboratory, including the books both weird and modern which he had borrowed from his study.
He had this van loaded in the black small hours, and his father recalls only a drowsy realisation
of stifled oaths and stamping feet on the night the goods were taken away. After that Charles moved
back to his own old quarters on the third floor, and never haunted the attic again.
To the Pawtuxet bungalow Charles transferred all the secrecy with which he had
surrounded his attic realm, save that he now appeared to have two sharers of his mysteries; a
villainous-looking Portuguese half-caste from the South Main St. waterfront who acted as a servant,
and a thin, scholarly stranger with dark glasses and a stubbly full beard of dyed aspect whose
status was evidently that of a colleague. Neighbours vainly tried to engage these odd persons in
conversation. The mulatto Gomes spoke very little English, and the bearded man, who gave his name
as Dr. Allen, voluntarily followed his example. Ward himself tried to be more affable, but
succeeded only in provoking curiosity with his rambling accounts of chemical research. Before long
queer tales began to circulate regarding the all-night burning of lights; and somewhat later, after
this burning had suddenly ceased, there rose still queerer tales of disproportionate orders of meat
from the butcher’s and of the muffled shouting, declamation, rhythmic chanting, and screaming
supposed to come from some very deep cellar below the place. Most distinctly the new and strange
household was bitterly disliked by the honest bourgeoisie of the vicinity, and it is not remarkable
that dark hints were advanced connecting the hated establishment with the current epidemic of
vampiristic attacks and murders; especially since the radius of that plague seemed now confined
wholly to Pawtuxet and the adjacent streets of Edgewood.
Ward spent most of his time at the bungalow, but slept occasionally at home and
was still reckoned a dweller beneath his father’s roof. Twice he was absent from the city on
week-long trips, whose destinations have not yet been discovered. He grew steadily paler and more
emaciated even than before, and lacked some of his former assurance when repeating to Dr. Willett
his old, old story of vital research and future revelations. Willett often waylaid him at his
father’s house, for the elder Ward was deeply worried and perplexed, and wished his son to
get as much sound oversight as could be managed in the case of so secretive and independent an
adult. The doctor still insists that the youth was sane even as late as this, and adduces many a
conversation to prove his point.
About September the vampirism declined, but in the following January Ward almost
became involved in serious trouble. For some time the nocturnal arrival and departure of motor
trucks at the Pawtuxet bungalow had been commented upon, and at this juncture an unforeseen hitch
exposed the nature of at least one item of their contents. In a lonely spot near Hope Valley had
occurred one of the frequent sordid waylayings of trucks by “hi-jackers” in quest of
liquor shipments, but this time the robbers had been destined to receive the greater shock. For the
long cases they seized proved upon opening to contain some exceedingly gruesome things; so
gruesome, in fact, that the matter could not be kept quiet amongst the denizens of the underworld.
The thieves had hastily buried what they discovered, but when the State Police got wind of the
matter a careful search was made. A recently arrested vagrant, under promise of immunity from
prosecution on any additional charge, at last consented to guide a party of troopers to the spot;
and there was found in that hasty cache a very hideous and shameful thing. It would not be well for
the national—or even the international—sense of decorum if the public were ever to know
what was uncovered by that awestruck party. There was no mistaking it, even by these far from
studious officers; and telegrams to Washington ensued with feverish rapidity.
The cases were addressed to Charles Ward at his Pawtuxet bungalow, and State and
Federal officials at once paid him a very forceful and serious call. They found him pallid and
worried with his two odd companions, and received from him what seemed to be a valid explanation
and evidence of innocence. He had needed certain anatomical specimens as part of a programme of
research whose depth and genuineness anyone who had known him in the last decade could prove, and
had ordered the required kind and number from agencies which he had thought as reasonably
legitimate as such things can be. Of the identity of the specimens he had known absolutely
nothing, and was properly shocked when the inspectors hinted at the monstrous effect on public
sentiment and national dignity which a knowledge of the matter would produce. In this statement he
was firmly sustained by his bearded colleague Dr. Allen, whose oddly hollow voice carried even more
conviction than his own nervous tones; so that in the end the officials took no action, but
carefully set down the New York name and address which Ward gave them as a basis for a search which
came to nothing. It is only fair to add that the specimens were quickly and quietly restored to
their proper places, and that the general public will never know of their blasphemous
disturbance.
On February 9, 1928, Dr. Willett received a letter from Charles Ward which he
considers of extraordinary importance, and about which he has frequently quarrelled with Dr. Lyman.
Lyman believes that this note contains positive proof of a well-developed case of dementia
praecox, but Willett on the other hand regards it as the last perfectly sane utterance of the
hapless youth. He calls especial attention to the normal character of the penmanship; which though
shewing traces of shattered nerves, is nevertheless distinctly Ward’s own. The text in full
is as follows:
“100 Prospect St.
Providence, R.I.,
February 8, 1928.

“Dear Dr. Willett:—
“I feel that at last the time has come for me to make the disclosures which
I have so long promised you, and for which you have pressed me so often. The patience you have
shewn in waiting, and the confidence you have shewn in my mind and integrity, are things I shall
never cease to appreciate.
“And now that I am ready to speak, I must own with humiliation that no
triumph such as I dreamed of can ever be mine. Instead of triumph I have found terror, and my talk
with you will not be a boast of victory but a plea for help and advice in saving both myself and
the world from a horror beyond all human conception or calculation. You recall what those Fenner
letters said of the old raiding party at Pawtuxet. That must all be done again, and quickly. Upon
us depends more than can be put into words—all civilisation, all natural law, perhaps even
the fate of the solar system and the universe. I have brought to light a monstrous abnormality, but
I did it for the sake of knowledge. Now for the sake of all life and Nature you must help me thrust
it back into the dark again.
“I have left that Pawtuxet place forever, and we must extirpate everything
existing there, alive or dead. I shall not go there again, and you must not believe it if you ever
hear that I am there. I will tell you why I say this when I see you. I have come home for good, and
wish you would call on me at the very first moment that you can spare five or six hours
continuously to hear what I have to say. It will take that long—and believe me when I tell
you that you never had a more genuine professional duty than this. My life and reason are the very
least things which hang in the balance.
“I dare not tell my father, for he could not grasp the whole thing. But I
have told him of my danger, and he has four men from a detective agency watching the house. I
don’t know how much good they can do, for they have against them forces which even you could
scarcely envisage or acknowledge. So come quickly if you wish to see me alive and hear how you may
help to save the cosmos from stark hell.
“Any time will do—I shall not be out of the house. Don’t
telephone ahead, for there is no telling who or what may try to intercept you. And let us pray to
whatever gods there be that nothing may prevent this meeting.
“In utmost gravity and desperation,
“Charles Dexter Ward.”

“P.S. Shoot Dr. Allen on sight and dissolve his body in acid. Don’t burn
it.”
Dr. Willett received this note about 10:30 a.m., and immediately arranged to spare
the whole late afternoon and evening for the momentous talk, letting it extend on into the night as
long as might be necessary. He planned to arrive about four o’clock, and through all the
intervening hours was so engulfed in every sort of wild speculation that most of his tasks were
very mechanically performed. Maniacal as the letter would have sounded to a stranger, Willett had
seen too much of Charles Ward’s oddities to dismiss it as sheer raving. That something very
subtle, ancient, and horrible was hovering about he felt quite sure, and the reference to Dr. Allen
could almost be comprehended in view of what Pawtuxet gossip said of Ward’s enigmatical
colleague. Willett had never seen the man, but had heard much of his aspect and bearing, and could
not but wonder what sort of eyes those much-discussed dark glasses might conceal.
Promptly at four Dr. Willett presented himself at the Ward residence, but found to
his annoyance that Charles had not adhered to his determination to remain indoors. The guards were
there, but said that the young man seemed to have lost part of his timidity. He had that morning
done much apparently frightened arguing and protesting over the telephone, one of the detectives
said, replying to some unknown voice with phrases such as “I am very tired and must rest a
while”, “I can’t receive anyone for some time, you’ll have to excuse
me”, “Please postpone decisive action till we can arrange some sort of
compromise”, or “I am very sorry, but I must take a complete vacation from everything;
I’ll talk with you later”. Then, apparently gaining boldness through meditation, he had
slipped out so quietly that no one had seen him depart or knew that he had gone until he returned
about one o’clock and entered the house without a word. He had gone upstairs, where a bit of
his fear must have surged back; for he was heard to cry out in a highly terrified fashion upon
entering his library, afterward trailing off into a kind of choking gasp. When, however, the butler
had gone to inquire what the trouble was, he had appeared at the door with a great show of
boldness, and had silently gestured the man away in a manner that terrified him unaccountably. Then
he had evidently done some rearranging of his shelves, for a great clattering and thumping and
creaking ensued; after which he had reappeared and left at once. Willett inquired whether or not
any message had been left, but was told that there was none. The butler seemed queerly disturbed
about something in Charles’s appearance and manner, and asked solicitously if there was much
hope for a cure of his disordered nerves.
For almost two hours Dr. Willett waited vainly in Charles Ward’s library,
watching the dusty shelves with their wide gaps where books had been removed, and smiling grimly at
the panelled overmantel on the north wall, whence a year before the suave features of old Joseph
Curwen had looked mildly down. After a time the shadows began to gather, and the sunset cheer gave
place to a vague growing terror which flew shadow-like before the night. Mr. Ward finally arrived,
and shewed much surprise and anger at his son’s absence after all the pains which had been
taken to guard him. He had not known of Charles’s appointment, and promised to notify Willett
when the youth returned. In bidding the doctor goodnight he expressed his utter perplexity at his
son’s condition, and urged his caller to do all he could to restore the boy to normal poise.
Willett was glad to escape from that library, for something frightful and unholy seemed to haunt
it; as if the vanished picture had left behind a legacy of evil. He had never liked that picture;
and even now, strong-nerved though he was, there lurked a quality in its vacant panel which made
him feel an urgent need to get out into the pure air as soon as possible.
3.
The next morning Willett received a message from the senior Ward, saying that
Charles was still absent. Mr. Ward mentioned that Dr. Allen had telephoned him to say that Charles
would remain at Pawtuxet for some time, and that he must not be disturbed. This was necessary
because Allen himself was suddenly called away for an indefinite period, leaving the researches in
need of Charles’s constant oversight. Charles sent his best wishes, and regretted any bother
his abrupt change of plans might have caused. In listening to this message Mr. Ward heard Dr.
Allen’s voice for the first time, and it seemed to excite some vague and elusive memory which
could not be actually placed, but which was disturbing to the point of fearfulness.
Faced by these baffling and contradictory reports, Dr. Willett was frankly at a
loss what to do. The frantic earnestness of Charles’s note was not to be denied, yet what
could one think of its writer’s immediate violation of his own expressed policy? Young Ward
had written that his delvings had become blasphemous and menacing, that they and his bearded
colleague must be extirpated at any cost, and that he himself would never return to their final
scene; yet according to latest advices he had forgotten all this and was back in the thick of the
mystery. Common sense bade one leave the youth alone with his freakishness, yet some deeper
instinct would not permit the impression of that frenzied letter to subside. Willett read it over
again, and could not make its essence sound as empty and insane as both its bombastic verbiage and
its lack of fulfilment would seem to imply. Its terror was too profound and real, and in
conjunction with what the doctor already knew evoked too vivid hints of monstrosities from beyond
time and space to permit of any cynical explanation. There were nameless horrors abroad; and no
matter how little one might be able to get at them, one ought to stand prepared for any sort of
action at any time.
For over a week Dr. Willett pondered on the dilemma which seemed thrust upon him,
and became more and more inclined to pay Charles a call at the Pawtuxet bungalow. No friend of the
youth had ever ventured to storm this forbidden retreat, and even his father knew of its interior
only from such descriptions as he chose to give; but Willett felt that some direct conversation
with his patient was necessary. Mr. Ward had been receiving brief and non-committal typed notes
from his son, and said that Mrs. Ward in her Atlantic City retirement had had no better word. So at
length the doctor resolved to act; and despite a curious sensation inspired by old legends of
Joseph Curwen, and by more recent revelations and warnings from Charles Ward, set boldly out for
the bungalow on the bluff above the river.
Willett had visited the spot before through sheer curiosity, though of course
never entering the house or proclaiming his presence; hence knew exactly the route to take. Driving
out Broad Street one early afternoon toward the end of February in his small motor, he thought
oddly of the grim party which had taken that selfsame road a hundred and fifty-seven years before
on a terrible errand which none might ever comprehend.
The ride through the city’s decaying fringe was short, and trim Edgewood and
sleepy Pawtuxet presently spread out ahead. Willett turned to the right down Lockwood Street and
drove his car as far along that rural road as he could, then alighted and walked north to where the
bluff towered above the lovely bends of the river and the sweep of misty downlands beyond. Houses
were still few here, and there was no mistaking the isolated bungalow with its concrete garage on a
high point of land at his left. Stepping briskly up the neglected gravel walk he rapped at the door
with a firm hand, and spoke without a tremor to the evil Portuguese mulatto who opened it to the
width of a crack.
He must, he said, see Charles Ward at once on vitally important business. No
excuse would be accepted, and a repulse would mean only a full report of the matter to the elder
Ward. The mulatto still hesitated, and pushed against the door when Willett attempted to open it;
but the doctor merely raised his voice and renewed his demands. Then there came from the dark
interior a husky whisper which somehow chilled the hearer through and through though he did not
know why he feared it. “Let him in, Tony,” it said, “we may as well talk now as
ever.” But disturbing as was the whisper, the greater fear was that which immediately
followed. The floor creaked and the speaker hove in sight—and the owner of those strange and
resonant tones was seen to be no other than Charles Dexter Ward.
The minuteness with which Dr. Willett recalled and recorded his conversation of
that afternoon is due to the importance he assigns to this particular period. For at last he
concedes a vital change in Charles Dexter Ward’s mentality, and believes that the youth now
spoke from a brain hopelessly alien to the brain whose growth he had watched for six and twenty
years. Controversy with Dr. Lyman has compelled him to be very specific, and he definitely dates
the madness of Charles Ward from the time the typewritten notes began to reach his parents. Those
notes are not in Ward’s normal style; not even in the style of that last frantic letter to
Willett. Instead, they are strange and archaic, as if the snapping of the writer’s mind had
released a flood of tendencies and impressions picked up unconsciously through boyhood
antiquarianism. There is an obvious effort to be modern, but the spirit and occasionally the
language are those of the past.
The past, too, was evident in Ward’s every tone and gesture as he received
the doctor in that shadowy bungalow. He bowed, motioned Willett to a seat, and began to speak
abruptly in that strange whisper which he sought to explain at the very outset.
“I am grown phthisical,” he began, “from this cursed river air.
You must excuse my speech. I suppose you are come from my father to see what ails me, and I hope
you will say nothing to alarm him.”
Willett was studying these scraping tones with extreme care, but studying even
more closely the face of the speaker. Something, he felt, was wrong; and he thought of what the
family had told him about the fright of that Yorkshire butler one night. He wished it were not so
dark, but did not request that any blind be opened. Instead, he merely asked Ward why he had so
belied the frantic note of little more than a week before.
“I was coming to that,” the host replied. “You must know, I am
in a very bad state of nerves, and do and say queer things I cannot account for. As I have told you
often, I am on the edge of great matters; and the bigness of them has a way of making me
light-headed. Any man might well be frighted of what I have found, but I am not to be put off for
long. I was a dunce to have that guard and stick at home; for having gone this far, my place is
here. I am not well spoke of by my prying neighbours, and perhaps I was led by weakness to believe
myself what they say of me. There is no evil to any in what I do, so long as I do it rightly. Have
the goodness to wait six months, and I’ll shew you what will pay your patience well.
“You may as well know I have a way of learning old matters from things surer
than books, and I’ll leave you to judge the importance of what I can give to history,
philosophy, and the arts by reason of the doors I have access to. My ancestor had all this when
those witless peeping Toms came and murdered him. I now have it again, or am coming very
imperfectly to have a part of it. This time nothing must happen, and least of all through any idiot
fears of my own. Pray forget all I writ you, Sir, and have no fear of this place or any in it. Dr.
Allen is a man of fine parts, and I owe him an apology for anything ill I have said of him. I wish
I had no need to spare him, but there were things he had to do elsewhere. His zeal is equal to mine
in all those matters, and I suppose that when I feared the work I feared him too as my greatest
helper in it.”
Ward paused, and the doctor hardly knew what to say or think. He felt almost
foolish in the face of this calm repudiation of the letter; and yet there clung to him the fact
that while the present discourse was strange and alien and indubitably mad, the note itself had
been tragic in its naturalness and likeness to the Charles Ward he knew. Willett now tried to turn
the talk on early matters, and recall to the youth some past events which would restore a familiar
mood; but in this process he obtained only the most grotesque results. It was the same with all the
alienists later on. Important sections of Charles Ward’s store of mental images, mainly those
touching modern times and his own personal life, had been unaccountably expunged; whilst all the
massed antiquarianism of his youth had welled up from some profound subconsciousness to engulf the
contemporary and the individual. The youth’s intimate knowledge of elder things was abnormal
and unholy, and he tried his best to hide it. When Willett would mention some favourite object of
his boyhood archaistic studies he often shed by pure accident such a light as no normal mortal
could conceivably be expected to possess, and the doctor shuddered as the glib allusion glided
by.
It was not wholesome to know so much about the way the fat sheriff’s wig
fell off as he leaned over at the play in Mr. Douglass’ Histrionick Academy in King Street on
the eleventh of February, 1762, which fell on a Thursday; or about how the actors cut the text of
Steele’s Conscious Lovers so badly that one was almost glad the Baptist-ridden
legislature closed the theatre a fortnight later. That Thomas Sabin’s Boston coach was
“damn’d uncomfortable” old letters may well have told; but what healthy
antiquarian could recall how the creaking of Epenetus Olney’s new signboard (the gaudy crown
he set up after he took to calling his tavern the Crown Coffee House) was exactly like the first
few notes of the new jazz piece all the radios in Pawtuxet were playing?
Ward, however, would not be quizzed long in this vein. Modern and personal topics
he waved aside quite summarily, whilst regarding antique affairs he soon shewed the plainest
boredom. What he wished clearly enough was only to satisfy his visitor enough to make him depart
without the intention of returning. To this end he offered to shew Willett the entire house, and at
once proceeded to lead the doctor through every room from cellar to attic. Willett looked sharply,
but noted that the visible books were far too few and trivial ever to have filled the wide gaps on
Ward’s shelves at home, and that the meagre so-called “laboratory” was the
flimsiest sort of a blind. Clearly there were a library and a laboratory elsewhere; but just where,
it was impossible to say. Essentially defeated in his quest for something he could not name,
Willett returned to town before evening and told the senior Ward everything which had occurred.
They agreed that the youth must be definitely out of his mind, but decided that nothing drastic
need be done just then. Above all, Mrs. Ward must be kept in as complete an ignorance as her
son’s own strange typed notes would permit.
Mr. Ward now determined to call in person upon his son, making it wholly a
surprise visit. Dr. Willett took him in his car one evening, guiding him to within sight of the
bungalow and waiting patiently for his return. The session was a long one, and the father emerged
in a very saddened and perplexed state. His reception had developed much like Willett’s, save
that Charles had been an excessively long time in appearing after the visitor had forced his way
into the hall and sent the Portuguese away with an imperative demand; and in the bearing of the
altered son there was no trace of filial affection. The lights had been dim, yet even so the youth
had complained that they dazzled him outrageously. He had not spoken out loud at all, averring that
his throat was in very poor condition; but in his hoarse whisper there was a quality so vaguely
disturbing that Mr. Ward could not banish it from his mind.
Now definitely leagued together to do all they could toward the youth’s
mental salvation, Mr. Ward and Dr. Willett set about collecting every scrap of data which the case
might afford. Pawtuxet gossip was the first item they studied, and this was relatively easy to
glean since both had friends in that region. Dr. Willett obtained the most rumours because people
talked more frankly to him than to a parent of the central figure, and from all he heard he could
tell that young Ward’s life had become indeed a strange one. Common tongues would not
dissociate his household from the vampirism of the previous summer, while the nocturnal comings and
goings of the motor trucks provided their share of dark speculation. Local tradesmen spoke of the
queerness of the orders brought them by the evil-looking mulatto, and in particular of the
inordinate amounts of meat and fresh blood secured from the two butcher shops in the immediate
neighbourhood. For a household of only three, these quantities were quite absurd.
Then there was the matter of the sounds beneath the earth. Reports of these things
were harder to pin down, but all the vague hints tallied in certain basic essentials. Noises of a
ritual nature positively existed, and at times when the bungalow was dark. They might, of course,
have come from the known cellar; but rumour insisted that there were deeper and more spreading
crypts. Recalling the ancient tales of Joseph Curwen’s catacombs, and assuming for granted
that the present bungalow had been selected because of its situation on the old Curwen site as
revealed in one or another of the documents found behind the picture, Willett and Mr. Ward gave
this phase of the gossip much attention; and searched many times without success for the door in
the river-bank which old manuscripts mentioned. As to popular opinions of the bungalow’s
various inhabitants, it was soon plain that the Brava Portuguese was loathed, the bearded and
spectacled Dr. Allen feared, and the pallid young scholar disliked to a profound extent. During the
last week or two Ward had obviously changed much, abandoning his attempts at affability and
speaking only in hoarse but oddly repellent whispers on the few occasions that he ventured
forth.
Such were the shreds and fragments gathered here and there; and over these Mr.
Ward and Dr. Willett held many long and serious conferences. They strove to exercise deduction,
induction, and constructive imagination to their utmost extent; and to correlate every known fact
of Charles’s later life, including the frantic letter which the doctor now shewed the father,
with the meagre documentary evidence available concerning old Joseph Curwen. They would have given
much for a glimpse of the papers Charles had found, for very clearly the key to the youth’s
madness lay in what he had learned of the ancient wizard and his doings.
4.
And yet, after all, it was from no step of Mr. Ward’s or Dr. Willett’s
that the next move in this singular case proceeded. The father and the physician, rebuffed and
confused by a shadow too shapeless and intangible to combat, had rested uneasily on their oars
while the typed notes of young Ward to his parents grew fewer and fewer. Then came the first of the
month with its customary financial adjustments, and the clerks at certain banks began a peculiar
shaking of heads and telephoning from one to the other. Officials who knew Charles Ward by sight
went down to the bungalow to ask why every cheque of his appearing at this juncture was a clumsy
forgery, and were reassurred less than they ought to have been when the youth hoarsely explained
that his hand had lately been so much affected by a nervous shock as to make normal writing
impossible. He could, he said, form no written characters at all except with great difficulty; and
could prove it by the fact that he had been forced to type all his recent letters, even those to
his father and mother, who would bear out the assertion.
What made the investigators pause in confusion was not this circumstance alone,
for that was nothing unprecedented or fundamentally suspicious; nor even the Pawtuxet gossip, of
which one or two of them had caught echoes. It was the muddled discourse of the young man which
nonplussed them, implying as it did a virtually total loss of memory concerning important monetary
matters which he had had at his fingertips only a month or two before. Something was wrong; for
despite the apparent coherence and rationality of his speech, there could be no normal reason for
this ill-concealed blankness on vital points. Moreover, although none of these men knew Ward well,
they could not help observing the change in his language and manner. They had heard he was an
antiquarian, but even the most hopeless antiquarians do not make daily use of obsolete phraseology
and gestures. Altogether, this combination of hoarseness, palsied hands, bad memory, and altered
speech and bearing must represent some disturbance or malady of genuine gravity, which no doubt
formed the basis of the prevailing odd rumours; and after their departure the party of officials
decided that a talk with the senior Ward was imperative.
So on the sixth of March, 1928, there was a long and serious conference in Mr.
Ward’s office, after which the utterly bewildered father summoned Dr. Willett in a kind of
helpless resignation. Willett looked over the strained and awkward signatures of the cheques, and
compared them in his mind with the penmanship of that last frantic note. Certainly, the change was
radical and profound, and yet there was something damnably familiar about the new writing. It had
crabbed and archaic tendencies of a very curious sort, and seemed to result from a type of stroke
utterly different from that which the youth had always used. It was strange—but where had he
seen it before? On the whole, it was obvious that Charles was insane. Of that there could be no
doubt. And since it appeared unlikely that he could handle his property or continue to deal with
the outside world much longer, something must quickly be done toward his oversight and possible
cure. It was then that the alienists were called in, Drs. Peck and Waite of Providence and Dr.
Lyman of Boston, to whom Mr. Ward and Dr. Willett gave the most exhaustive possible history of the
case, and who conferred at length in the now unused library of their young patient, examining what
books and papers of his were left in order to gain some further notion of his habitual mental cast.
After scanning this material and examining the ominous note to Willett they all agreed that Charles
Ward’s studies had been enough to unseat or at least to warp any ordinary intellect, and
wished most heartily that they could see his more intimate volumes and documents; but this latter
they knew they could do, if at all, only after a scene at the bungalow itself. Willett now reviewed
the whole case with febrile energy; it being at this time that he obtained the statements of the
workmen who had seen Charles find the Curwen documents, and that he collated the incidents of the
destroyed newspaper items, looking up the latter at the Journal office.
On Thursday, the eighth of March, Drs. Willett, Peck, Lyman, and Waite,
accompanied by Mr. Ward, paid the youth their momentous call; making no concealment of their object
and questioning the now acknowledged patient with extreme minuteness. Charles, though he was
inordinately long in answering the summons and was still redolent of strange and noxious laboratory
odours when he did finally make his agitated appearance, proved a far from recalcitrant subject;
and admitted freely that his memory and balance had suffered somewhat from close application to
abstruse studies. He offered no resistance when his removal to other quarters was insisted upon;
and seemed, indeed, to display a high degree of intelligence as apart from mere memory. His conduct
would have sent his interviewers away in bafflement had not the persistently archaic trend of his
speech and unmistakable replacement of modern by ancient ideas in his consciousness marked him out
as one definitely removed from the normal. Of his work he would say no more to the group of doctors
than he had formerly said to his family and to Dr. Willett, and his frantic note of the previous
month he dismissed as mere nerves and hysteria. He insisted that this shadowy bungalow possessed no
library or laboratory beyond the visible ones, and waxed abstruse in explaining the absence from
the house of such odours as now saturated all his clothing. Neighbourhood gossip he attributed to
nothing more than the cheap inventiveness of baffled curiosity. Of the whereabouts of Dr. Allen he
said he did not feel at liberty to speak definitely, but assured his inquisitors that the bearded
and spectacled man would return when needed. In paying off the stolid Brava who resisted all
questioning by the visitors, and in closing the bungalow which still seemed to hold such nighted
secrets, Ward shewed no sign of nervousness save a barely noticed tendency to pause as though
listening for something very faint. He was apparently animated by a calmly philosophic resignation,
as if his removal were the merest transient incident which would cause the least trouble if
facilitated and disposed of once and for all. It was clear that he trusted to his obviously
unimpaired keenness of absolute mentality to overcome all the embarrassments into which his twisted
memory, his lost voice and handwriting, and his secretive and eccentric behaviour had led him. His
mother, it was agreed, was not to be told of the change; his father supplying typed notes in his
name. Ward was taken to the restfully and picturesquely situated private hospital maintained by Dr.
Waite on Conanicut Island in the bay, and subjected to the closest scrutiny and questioning by all
the physicians connected with the case. It was then that the physical oddities were noticed; the
slackened metabolism, the altered skin, and the disproportionate neural reactions. Dr. Willett was
the most perturbed of the various examiners, for he had attended Ward all his life and could
appreciate with terrible keenness the extent of his physical disorganisation. Even the familiar
olive mark on his hip was gone, while on his chest was a great black mole or cicatrice which had
never been there before, and which made Willett wonder whether the youth had ever submitted to any
of the “witch markings” reputed to be inflicted at certain unwholesome nocturnal
meetings in wild and lonely places. The doctor could not keep his mind off a certain transcribed
witch-trial record from Salem which Charles had shewn him in the old non-secretive days, and which
read: “Mr. G. B. on that Nighte putt ye Divell his Marke upon
Bridget S., Jonathan A., Simon O., Deliverance W., Joseph C., Susan P., Mehitable C., and Deborah
B.” Ward’s face, too, troubled him horribly, till at length he suddenly discovered why
he was horrified. For above the young man’s right eye was something which he had never
previously noticed—a small scar or pit precisely like that in the crumbled painting of old
Joseph Curwen, and perhaps attesting some hideous ritualistic inoculation to which both had
submitted at a certain stage of their occult careers.
While Ward himself was puzzling all the doctors at the hospital a very strict
watch was kept on all mail addressed either to him or to Dr. Allen, which Mr. Ward had ordered
delivered at the family home. Willett had predicted that very little would be found, since any
communications of a vital nature would probably have been exchanged by messenger; but in the latter
part of March there did come a letter from Prague for Dr. Allen which gave both the doctor and the
father deep thought. It was in a very crabbed and archaic hand; and though clearly not the effort
of a foreigner, shewed almost as singular a departure from modern English as the speech of young
Ward himself. It read:
Kleinstrasse 11,
Altstadt, Prague,
11th Feby. 1928.

Brother in Almousin-Metraton:—
I this day receiv’d yr mention of what came
up from the Salts I sent you. It was wrong, and meanes clearly that ye Headstones had been chang’d when Barnabas gott me the Specimen.
It is often so, as you must be sensible of from the Thing you gott from ye Kings Chapell ground in 1769 and what H. gott from Olde Bury’g
Point in 1690, that was like to ende him. I gott such a Thing in Aegypt 75 yeares gone, from the
which came that Scar ye Boy saw on me here in 1924. As I told you
longe ago, do not calle up That which you can not put downe; either from dead Saltes or out of
ye Spheres beyond. Have ye Wordes
for laying at all times readie, and stopp not to be sure when there is any Doubte of Whom
you have. Stones are all chang’d now in Nine groundes out of 10. You are never sure till you
question. I this day heard from H., who has had Trouble with the Soldiers. He is like to be sorry
Transylvania is pass’d from Hungary to Roumania, and wou’d change his Seat if the
Castel weren’t so fulle of What we Knowe. But of this he hath doubtless writ you. In my next
Send’g there will be Somewhat from a Hill tomb from ye East
that will delight you greatly. Meanwhile forget not I am desirous of B. F. if you can possibly get
him for me. You know G. in Philada. better than I. Have him up firste if you will, but doe not use
him soe hard he will be Difficult, for I must speake to him in ye
End.
Yogg-Sothoth Neblod Zin
Simon O.

To Mr. J. C. in

Providence.
Mr. Ward and Dr. Willett paused in utter chaos before this apparent bit of
unrelieved insanity. Only by degrees did they absorb what it seemed to imply. So the absent Dr.
Allen, and not Charles Ward, had come to be the leading spirit at Pawtuxet? That must explain the
wild reference and denunciation in the youth’s last frantic letter. And what of this
addressing of the bearded and spectacled stranger as “Mr. J. C.”? There was no escaping
the inference, but there are limits to possible monstrosity. Who was “Simon O.”; the
old man Ward had visited in Prague four years previously? Perhaps, but in the centuries behind
there had been another Simon O.—Simon Orne, alias Jedediah, of Salem, who vanished in 1771,
and whose peculiar handwriting Dr. Willett now unmistakably recognised from the photostatic
copies of the Orne formulae which Charles had once shewn him. What horrors and mysteries, what
contradictions and contraventions of Nature, had come back after a century and a half to harass Old
Providence with her clustered spires and domes?
The father and the old physician, virtually at a loss what to do or think, went to
see Charles at the hospital and questioned him as delicately as they could about Dr. Allen, about
the Prague visit, and about what he had learned of Simon or Jedediah Orne of Salem. To all these
inquiries the youth was politely non-committal, merely barking in his hoarse whisper that he had
found Dr. Allen to have a remarkable spiritual rapport with certain souls from the past, and that
any correspondent the bearded man might have in Prague would probably be similarly gifted. When
they left, Mr. Ward and Dr. Willett realised to their chagrin that they had really been the ones
under catechism; and that without imparting anything vital himself, the confined youth had adroitly
pumped them of everything the Prague letter had contained.
Drs. Peck, Waite, and Lyman were not inclined to attach much importance to the
strange correspondence of young Ward’s companion; for they knew the tendency of kindred
eccentrics and monomaniacs to band together, and believed that Charles or Allen had merely
unearthed an expatriated counterpart—perhaps one who had seen Orne’s handwriting and
copied it in an attempt to pose as the bygone character’s reincarnation. Allen himself was
perhaps a similar case, and may have persuaded the youth into accepting him as an avatar of the
long-dead Curwen. Such things had been known before, and on the same basis the hard-headed doctors
disposed of Willett’s growing disquiet about Charles Ward’s present handwriting, as
studied from unpremeditated specimens obtained by various ruses. Willett thought he had placed its
odd familiarity at last, and that what it vaguely resembled was the bygone penmanship of old Joseph
Curwen himself; but this the other physicians regarded as a phase of imitativeness only to be
expected in a mania of this sort, and refused to grant it any importance either favourable or
unfavourable. Recognising this prosaic attitude in his colleagues, Willett advised Mr. Ward to keep
to himself the letter which arrived for Dr. Allen on the second of April from Rakus, Transylvania,
in a handwriting so intensely and fundamentally like that of the Hutchinson cipher that both father
and physician paused in awe before breaking the seal. This read as follows:
Castle Ferenczy
7 March 1928.

Dear C.:—Hadd a Squad of 20 Militia up to talk about what the Country Folk say. Must digg
deeper and have less Hearde. These Roumanians plague me damnably, being officious and particular
where you cou’d buy a Magyar off with a Drinke and ffood. Last monthe M. got me ye Sarcophagus of ye Five Sphinxes from
ye Acropolis where He whome I call’d up say’d it
wou’d be, and I have hadde 3 Talkes with What was therein inhum’d. It will go to
S. O. in Prague directly, and thence to you. It is stubborn but you know ye Way with Such. You shew Wisdom in having lesse about than Before; for
there was no Neede to keep the Guards in Shape and eat’g off their Heads, and it made Much to
be founde in Case of Trouble, as you too welle knowe. You can now move and worke elsewhere
with no Kill’g Trouble if needful, tho’ I hope no Thing will soon force you to so
Bothersome a Course. I rejoice that you traffick not so much with Those Outside; for there
was ever a Mortall Peril in it, and you are sensible what it did when you ask’d Protection of
One not dispos’d to give it. You excel me in gett’g ye
fformulae so another may saye them with Success, but Borellus fancy’d it wou’d
be so if just ye right Wordes were hadd. Does ye Boy use ’em often? I regret that he growes squeamish, as I
fear’d he wou’d when I hadde him here nigh 15 Monthes, but am sensible you knowe how to
deal with him. You can’t saye him down with ye fformula, for
that will Worke only upon such as ye other fformula hath
call’d up from Saltes; but you still have strong Handes and Knife and Pistol, and Graves are
not harde to digg, nor Acids loth to burne. O. sayes you have promis’d him B. F. I must have
him after. B. goes to you soone, and may he give you what you wishe of that Darke Thing belowe
Memphis. Imploy care in what you calle up, and beware of ye Boy. It
will be ripe in a yeare’s time to have up ye Legions from
Underneath, and then there are no Boundes to what shal be oures. Have Confidence in what I saye,
for you knowe O. and I have hadd these 150 yeares more than you to consulte these Matters in.
Nephren-Ka nai Hadoth
Edw: H.

For J. Curwen, Esq.
Providence.
But if Willett and Mr. Ward refrained from shewing this letter to the alienists,
they did not refrain from acting upon it themselves. No amount of learned sophistry could
controvert the fact that the strangely bearded and spectacled Dr. Allen, of whom Charles’s
frantic letter had spoken as such a monstrous menace, was in close and sinister correspondence with
two inexplicable creatures whom Ward had visited in his travels and who plainly claimed to be
survivals or avatars of Curwen’s old Salem colleagues; that he was regarding himself as the
reincarnation of Joseph Curwen, and that he entertained—or was at least advised to
entertain—murderous designs against a “boy” who could scarcely be other than
Charles Ward. There was organised horror afoot; and no matter who had started it, the missing Allen
was by this time at the bottom of it. Therefore, thanking heaven that Charles was now safe in the
hospital, Mr. Ward lost no time in engaging detectives to learn all they could of the cryptic
bearded doctor; finding whence he had come and what Pawtuxet knew of him, and if possible
discovering his current whereabouts. Supplying the men with one of the bungalow keys which Charles
yielded up, he urged them to explore Allen’s vacant room which had been identified when the
patient’s belongings had been packed; obtaining what clues they could from any effects he
might have left about. Mr. Ward talked with the detectives in his son’s old library, and they
felt a marked relief when they left it at last; for there seemed to hover about the place a vague
aura of evil. Perhaps it was what they had heard of the infamous old wizard whose picture had once
stared from the panelled overmantel, and perhaps it was something different and irrelevant; but in
any case they all half sensed an intangible miasma which centred in that carven vestige of an older
dwelling and which at times almost rose to the intensity of a material emanation.
V. A Nightmare and a Cataclysm1.

And now swiftly followed that hideous experience which has left its indelible mark of fear on the
soul of Marinus Bicknell Willett, and has added a decade to the visible age of one whose youth was
even then far behind. Dr. Willett had conferred at length with Mr. Ward, and had come to an
agreement with him on several points which both felt the alienists would ridicule. There was, they
conceded, a terrible movement alive in the world, whose direct connexion with a necromancy even
older than the Salem witchcraft could not be doubted. That at least two living men—and one
other of whom they dared not think—were in absolute possession of minds or personalities
which had functioned as early as 1690 or before was likewise almost unassailably proved even in the
face of all known natural laws. What these horrible creatures—and Charles Ward as
well—were doing or trying to do seemed fairly clear from their letters and from every bit of
light both old and new which had filtered in upon the case. They were robbing the tombs of all the
ages, including those of the world’s wisest and greatest men, in the hope of recovering from
the bygone ashes some vestige of the consciousness and lore which had once animated and informed
them.
A hideous traffick was going on among these nightmare ghouls, whereby illustrious
bones were bartered with the calm calculativeness of schoolboys swapping books; and from what was
extorted from this centuried dust there was anticipated a power and a wisdom beyond anything which
the cosmos had ever seen concentrated in one man or group. They had found unholy ways to keep their
brains alive, either in the same body or different bodies; and had evidently achieved a way of
tapping the consciousness of the dead whom they gathered together. There had, it seems, been some
truth in chimerical old Borellus when he wrote of preparing from even the most antique remains
certain “Essential Saltes” from which the shade of a long-dead living thing might be
raised up. There was a formula for evoking such a shade, and another for putting it down; and it
had now been so perfected that it could be taught successfully. One must be careful about
evocations, for the markers of old graves are not always accurate.
Willett and Mr. Ward shivered as they passed from conclusion to conclusion.
Things—presences or voices of some sort—could be drawn down from unknown places as well
as from the grave, and in this process also one must be careful. Joseph Curwen had indubitably
evoked many forbidden things, and as for Charles—what might one think of him? What forces
“outside the spheres” had reached him from Joseph Curwen’s day and turned his
mind on forgotten things? He had been led to find certain directions, and he had used them. He had
talked with the man of horror in Prague and stayed long with the creature in the mountains of
Transylvania. And he must have found the grave of Joseph Curwen at last. That newspaper item and
what his mother had heard in the night were too significant to overlook. Then he had summoned
something, and it must have come. That mighty voice aloft on Good Friday, and those
different tones in the locked attic laboratory. What were they like, with their depth and
hollowness? Was there not here some awful foreshadowing of the dreaded stranger Dr. Allen with his
spectral bass? Yes, that was what Mr. Ward had felt with vague horror in his single talk
with the man—if man it were—over the telephone!
What hellish consciousness or voice, what morbid shade or presence, had come to
answer Charles Ward’s secret rites behind that locked door? Those voices heard in
argument—“must have it red for three months”—Good God! Was not that just
before the vampirism broke out? The rifling of Ezra Weeden’s ancient grave, and the cries
later at Pawtuxet—whose mind had planned the vengeance and rediscovered the shunned seat of
elder blasphemies? And then the bungalow and the bearded stranger, and the gossip, and the fear.
The final madness of Charles neither father nor doctor could attempt to explain, but they did feel
sure that the mind of Joseph Curwen had come to earth again and was following its ancient
morbidities. Was daemoniac possession in truth a possibility? Allen had something to do with it,
and the detectives must find out more about one whose existence menaced the young man’s life.
In the meantime, since the existence of some vast crypt beneath the bungalow seemed virtually
beyond dispute, some effort must be made to find it. Willett and Mr. Ward, conscious of the
sceptical attitude of the alienists, resolved during their final conference to undertake a joint
secret exploration of unparalleled thoroughness; and agreed to meet at the bungalow on the
following morning with valises and with certain tools and accessories suited to architectural
search and underground exploration.
The morning of April 6th dawned clear, and both explorers were at the bungalow by
ten o’clock. Mr. Ward had the key, and an entry and cursory survey were made. From the
disordered condition of Dr. Allen’s room it was obvious that the detectives had been there
before, and the later searchers hoped that they had found some clue which might prove of value. Of
course the main business lay in the cellar; so thither they descended without much delay, again
making the circuit which each had vainly made before in the presence of the mad young owner. For a
time everything seemed baffling, each inch of the earthen floor and stone walls having so solid and
innocuous an aspect that the thought of a yawning aperture was scarcely to be entertained. Willett
reflected that since the original cellar was dug without knowledge of any catacombs beneath, the
beginning of the passage would represent the strictly modern delving of young Ward and his
associates, where they had probed for the ancient vaults whose rumour could have reached them by no
wholesome means.
The doctor tried to put himself in Charles’s place to see how a delver would
be likely to start, but could not gain much inspiration from this method. Then he decided on
elimination as a policy, and went carefully over the whole subterranean surface both vertical and
horizontal, trying to account for every inch separately. He was soon substantially narrowed down,
and at last had nothing left but the small platform before the washtubs, which he had tried once
before in vain. Now experimenting in every possible way, and exerting a double strength, he finally
found that the top did indeed turn and slide horizontally on a corner pivot. Beneath it lay a trim
concrete surface with an iron manhole, to which Mr. Ward at once rushed with excited zeal. The
cover was not hard to lift, and the father had quite removed it when Willett noticed the queerness
of his aspect. He was swaying and nodding dizzily, and in the gust of noxious air which swept up
from the black pit beneath the doctor soon recognised ample cause.
In a moment Dr. Willett had his fainting companion on the floor above and was
reviving him with cold water. Mr. Ward responded feebly, but it could be seen that the mephitic
blast from the crypt had in some way gravely sickened him. Wishing to take no chances, Willett
hastened out to Broad Street for a taxicab and had soon dispatched the sufferer home despite his
weak-voiced protests; after which he produced an electric torch, covered his nostrils with a band
of sterile gauze, and descended once more to peer into the new-found depths. The foul air had now
slightly abated, and Willett was able to send a beam of light down the Stygian hole. For about ten
feet, he saw, it was a sheer cylindrical drop with concrete walls and an iron ladder; after which
the hole appeared to strike a flight of old stone steps which must originally have emerged to earth
somewhat southwest of the present building.
2.
Willett freely admits that for a moment the memory of the old Curwen legends kept
him from climbing down alone into that malodorous gulf. He could not help thinking of what Luke
Fenner had reported on that last monstrous night. Then duty asserted itself and he made the plunge,
carrying a great valise for the removal of whatever papers might prove of supreme importance.
Slowly, as befitted one of his years, he descended the ladder and reached the slimy steps below.
This was ancient masonry, his torch told him; and upon the dripping walls he saw the unwholesome
moss of centuries. Down, down, ran the steps; not spirally, but in three abrupt turns; and with
such narrowness that two men could have passed only with difficulty. He had counted about thirty
when a sound reached him very faintly; and after that he did not feel disposed to count any
more.
It was a godless sound; one of those low-keyed, insidious outrages of Nature which
are not meant to be. To call it a dull wail, a doom-dragged whine, or a hopeless howl of chorused
anguish and stricken flesh without mind would be to miss its most quintessential loathsomeness and
soul-sickening overtones. Was it for this that Ward had seemed to listen on that day he was
removed? It was the most shocking thing that Willett had ever heard, and it continued from no
determinate point as the doctor reached the bottom of the steps and cast his torchlight around on
lofty corridor walls surmounted by Cyclopean vaulting and pierced by numberless black archways. The
hall in which he stood was perhaps fourteen feet high to the middle of the vaulting and ten or
twelve feet broad. Its pavement was of large chipped flagstones, and its walls and roof were of
dressed masonry. Its length he could not imagine, for it stretched ahead indefinitely into the
blackness. Of the archways, some had doors of the old six-panelled colonial type, whilst others had
none.
Overcoming the dread induced by the smell and the howling, Willett began to
explore these archways one by one; finding beyond them rooms with groined stone ceilings, each of
medium size and apparently of bizarre uses. Most of them had fireplaces, the upper courses of whose
chimneys would have formed an interesting study in engineering. Never before or since had he seen
such instruments or suggestions of instruments as here loomed up on every hand through the burying
dust and cobwebs of a century and a half, in many cases evidently shattered as if by the ancient
raiders. For many of the chambers seemed wholly untrodden by modern feet, and must have represented
the earliest and most obsolete phases of Joseph Curwen’s experimentation. Finally there came
a room of obvious modernity, or at least of recent occupancy. There were oil heaters, bookshelves
and tables, chairs and cabinets, and a desk piled high with papers of varying antiquity and
contemporaneousness. Candlesticks and oil lamps stood about in several places; and finding a
match-safe handy, Willett lighted such as were ready for use.
In the fuller gleam it appeared that this apartment was nothing less than the
latest study or library of Charles Ward. Of the books the doctor had seen many before, and a good
part of the furniture had plainly come from the Prospect Street mansion. Here and there was a piece
well known to Willett, and the sense of familiarity became so great that he half forgot the
noisomeness and the wailing, both of which were plainer here than they had been at the foot of the
steps. His first duty, as planned long ahead, was to find and seize any papers which might seem of
vital importance; especially those portentous documents found by Charles so long ago behind the
picture in Olney Court. As he searched he perceived how stupendous a task the final unravelling
would be; for file on file was stuffed with papers in curious hands and bearing curious designs, so
that months or even years might be needed for a thorough deciphering and editing. Once he found
large packets of letters with Prague and Rakus postmarks, and in writing clearly recognisable as
Orne’s and Hutchinson’s; all of which he took with him as part of the bundle to be
removed in his valise.
At last, in a locked mahogany cabinet once gracing the Ward home, Willett found
the batch of old Curwen papers; recognising them from the reluctant glimpse Charles had granted him
so many years ago. The youth had evidently kept them together very much as they had been when first
he found them, since all the titles recalled by the workmen were present except the papers
addressed to Orne and Hutchinson, and the cipher with its key. Willett placed the entire lot in his
valise and continued his examination of the files. Since young Ward’s immediate condition was
the greatest matter at stake, the closest searching was done among the most obviously recent
matter; and in this abundance of contemporary manuscript one very baffling oddity was noted. The
oddity was the slight amount in Charles’s normal writing, which indeed included nothing more
recent than two months before. On the other hand, there were literally reams of symbols and
formulae, historical notes and philosophical comment, in a crabbed penmanship absolutely identical
with the ancient script of Joseph Curwen, though of undeniably modern dating. Plainly, a part of
the latter-day programme had been a sedulous imitation of the old wizard’s writing, which
Charles seemed to have carried to a marvellous state of perfection. Of any third hand which might
have been Allen’s there was not a trace. If he had indeed come to be the leader, he must have
forced young Ward to act as his amanuensis.
In this new material one mystic formula, or rather pair of formulae, recurred so
often that Willett had it by heart before he had half finished his quest. It consisted of two
parallel columns, the left-hand one surmounted by the archaic symbol called “Dragon’s
Head” and used in almanacks to indicate the ascending node, and the right-hand one headed by
a corresponding sign of “Dragon’s Tail” or descending node. The appearance of the
whole was something like this, and almost unconsciously the doctor realised that the second half
was no more than the first written syllabically backward with the exception of the final
monosyllables and of the odd name Yog-Sothoth, which he had come to recognise under various
spellings from other things he had seen in connexion with this horrible matter. The formulae were
as follows—exactly so, as Willett is abundantly able to testify—and the first
one struck an odd note of uncomfortable latent memory in his brain, which he recognised later when
reviewing the events of that horrible Good Friday of the previous year.



         Y’AI ’NG’NGAH,
YOG-SOTHOTH
         H’EE—L’GEB
         F’AI THRODOG
UAAAH


         OGTHROD AI’F
         GEB’L—EE’H
YOG-SOTHOTH
         ’NGAH’NG AI’Y
ZHRO



So haunting were these formulae, and so frequently did he come upon them, that before the doctor
knew it he was repeating them under his breath. Eventually, however, he felt he had secured all the
papers he could digest to advantage for the present; hence resolved to examine no more till he
could bring the sceptical alienists en masse for an ampler and more systematic raid. He had still
to find the hidden laboratory, so leaving his valise in the lighted room he emerged again into the
black noisome corridor whose vaulting echoed ceaselessly with that dull and hideous whine.
The next few rooms he tried were all abandoned, or filled only with crumbling
boxes and ominous-looking leaden coffins; but impressed him deeply with the magnitude of Joseph
Curwen’s original operations. He thought of the slaves and seamen who had disappeared, of the
graves which had been violated in every part of the world, and of what that final raiding party
must have seen; and then he decided it was better not to think any more. Once a great stone
staircase mounted at his right, and he deduced that this must have reached to one of the Curwen
outbuildings—perhaps the famous stone edifice with the high slit-like windows—provided
the steps he had descended had led from the steep-roofed farmhouse. Suddenly the walls seemed to
fall away ahead, and the stench and the wailing grew stronger. Willett saw that he had come upon a
vast open space, so great that his torchlight would not carry across it; and as he advanced he
encountered occasional stout pillars supporting the arches of the roof.
After a time he reached a circle of pillars grouped like the monoliths of
Stonehenge, with a large carved altar on a base of three steps in the centre; and so curious were
the carvings on that altar that he approached to study them with his electric light. But when he
saw what they were he shrank away shuddering, and did not stop to investigate the dark stains which
discoloured the upper surface and had spread down the sides in occasional thin lines. Instead, he
found the distant wall and traced it as it swept round in a gigantic circle perforated by
occasional black doorways and indented by a myriad of shallow cells with iron gratings and wrist
and ankle bonds on chains fastened to the stone of the concave rear masonry. These cells were
empty, but still the horrible odour and the dismal moaning continued, more insistent now than ever,
and seemingly varied at times by a sort of slippery thumping.
3.
From that frightful smell and that uncanny noise Willett’s attention could
no longer be diverted. Both were plainer and more hideous in the great pillared hall than anywhere
else, and carried a vague impression of being far below, even in this dark nether world of
subterrene mystery. Before trying any of the black archways for steps leading further down, the
doctor cast his beam of light about the stone-flagged floor. It was very loosely paved, and at
irregular intervals there would occur a slab curiously pierced by small holes in no definite
arrangement, while at one point there lay a very long ladder carelessly flung down. To this ladder,
singularly enough, appeared to cling a particularly large amount of the frightful odour which
encompassed everything. As he walked slowly about it suddenly occurred to Willett that both the
noise and the odour seemed strongest directly above the oddly pierced slabs, as if they might be
crude trap-doors leading down to some still deeper region of horror. Kneeling by one, he worked at
it with his hands, and found that with extreme difficulty he could budge it. At his touch the
moaning beneath ascended to a louder key, and only with vast trepidation did he persevere in the
lifting of the heavy stone. A stench unnamable now rose up from below, and the doctor’s head
reeled dizzily as he laid back the slab and turned his torch upon the exposed square yard of gaping
blackness.
If he had expected a flight of steps to some wide gulf of ultimate abomination,
Willett was destined to be disappointed; for amidst that foetor and cracked whining he discerned
only the brick-faced top of a cylindrical well perhaps a yard and a half in diameter and devoid of
any ladder or other means of descent. As the light shone down, the wailing changed suddenly to a
series of horrible yelps; in conjunction with which there came again that sound of blind, futile
scrambling and slippery thumping. The explorer trembled, unwilling even to imagine what noxious
thing might be lurking in that abyss, but in a moment mustered up the courage to peer over the
rough-hewn brink; lying at full length and holding the torch downward at arm’s length to see
what might lie below. For a second he could distinguish nothing but the slimy, moss-grown brick
walls sinking illimitably into that half-tangible miasma of murk and foulness and anguished frenzy;
and then he saw that something dark was leaping clumsily and frantically up and down at the bottom
of the narrow shaft, which must have been from twenty to twenty-five feet below the stone floor
where he lay. The torch shook in his hand, but he looked again to see what manner of living
creature might be immured there in the darkness of that unnatural well; left starving by young Ward
through all the long month since the doctors had taken him away, and clearly only one of a vast
number prisoned in the kindred wells whose pierced stone covers so thickly studded in the floor of
the great vaulted cavern. Whatever the things were, they could not lie down in their cramped
spaces; but must have crouched and whined and waited and feebly leaped all those hideous weeks
since their master had abandoned them unheeded.
But Marinus Bicknell Willett was sorry that he looked again; for surgeon and
veteran of the dissecting-room though he was, he has not been the same since. It is hard to explain
just how a single sight of a tangible object with measureable dimensions could so shake and change
a man; and we may only say that there is about certain outlines and entities a power of symbolism
and suggestion which acts frightfully on a sensitive thinker’s perspective and whispers
terrible hints of obscure cosmic relationships and unnamable realities behind the protective
illusions of common vision. In that second look Willett saw such an outline or entity, for during
the next few instants he was undoubtedly as stark mad as any inmate of Dr. Waite’s private
hospital. He dropped the electric torch from a hand drained of muscular power or nervous
coördination, nor heeded the sound of crunching teeth which told of its fate at the bottom of
the pit. He screamed and screamed and screamed in a voice whose falsetto panic no acquaintance of
his would ever have recognised; and though he could not rise to his feet he crawled and rolled
desperately away over the damp pavement where dozens of Tartarean wells poured forth their
exhausted whining and yelping to answer his own insane cries. He tore his hands on the rough, loose
stones, and many times bruised his head against the frequent pillars, but still he kept on. Then at
last he slowly came to himself in the utter blackness and stench, and stopped his ears against the
droning wail into which the burst of yelping had subsided. He was drenched with perspiration and
without means of producing a light; stricken and unnerved in the abysmal blackness and horror, and
crushed with a memory he never could efface. Beneath him dozens of those things still lived, and
from one of the shafts the cover was removed. He knew that what he had seen could never climb up
the slippery walls, yet shuddered at the thought that some obscure foot-hold might exist.
What the thing was, he would never tell. It was like some of the carvings on the
hellish altar, but it was alive. Nature had never made it in this form, for it was too palpably
unfinished. The deficiencies were of the most surprising sort, and the abnormalities of
proportion could not be described. Willett consents only to say that this type of thing must have
represented entities which Ward called up from imperfect salts, and which he kept for
servile or ritualistic purposes. If it had not had a certain significance, its image would not have
been carved on that damnable stone. It was not the worst thing depicted on that stone—but
Willett never opened the other pits. At the time, the first connected idea in his mind was an idle
paragraph from some of the old Curwen data he had digested long before; a phrase used by Simon or
Jedediah Orne in that portentous confiscated letter to the bygone sorcerer: “Certainely,
there was Noth’g butt ye liveliest Awfulness in that which H.
rais’d upp from What he cou’d gather onlie a part of.”
Then, horribly supplementing rather than displacing this image, there came a
recollection of those ancient lingering rumours anent the burned, twisted thing found in the fields
a week after the Curwen raid. Charles Ward had once told the doctor what old Slocum said of that
object; that it was neither thoroughly human, nor wholly allied to any animal which Pawtuxet folk
had ever seen or read about.
These words hummed in the doctor’s mind as he rocked to and fro, squatting
on the nitrous stone floor. He tried to drive them out, and repeated the Lord’s Prayer to
himself; eventually trailing off into a mnemonic hodge-podge like the modernistic Waste Land
of Mr. T. S. Eliot and finally reverting to the oft-repeated dual formula he had lately found in
Ward’s underground library: “Y’ai ’ng’ngah,
Yog-Sothoth”, and so on till the final underlined “Zhro”. It seemed to
soothe him, and he staggered to his feet after a time; lamenting bitterly his fright-lost torch and
looking wildly about for any gleam of light in the clutching inkiness of the chilly air. Think he
would not; but he strained his eyes in every direction for some faint glint or reflection of the
bright illumination he had left in the library. After a while he thought he detected a suspicion of
a glow infinitely far away, and toward this he crawled in agonised caution on hands and knees
amidst the stench and howling, always feeling ahead lest he collide with the numerous great pillars
or stumble into the abominable pit he had uncovered.
Once his shaking fingers touched something which he knew must be the steps leading
to the hellish altar, and from this spot he recoiled in loathing. At another time he encountered
the pierced slab he had removed, and here his caution became almost pitiful. But he did not come
upon the dread aperture after all, nor did anything issue from that aperture to detain him. What
had been down there made no sound nor stir. Evidently its crunching of the fallen electric torch
had not been good for it. Each time Willett’s fingers felt a perforated slab he trembled. His
passage over it would sometimes increase the groaning below, but generally it would produce no
effect at all, since he moved very noiselessly. Several times during his progress the glow ahead
diminished perceptibly, and he realised that the various candles and lamps he had left must be
expiring one by one. The thought of being lost in utter darkness without matches amidst this
underground world of nightmare labyrinths impelled him to rise to his feet and run, which he could
safely do now that he had passed the open pit; for he knew that once the light failed, his only
hope of rescue and survival would lie in whatever relief party Mr. Ward might send after missing
him for a sufficient period. Presently, however, he emerged from the open space into the narrower
corridor and definitely located the glow as coming from a door on his right. In a moment he had
reached it and was standing once more in young Ward’s secret library, trembling with relief,
and watching the sputterings of that last lamp which had brought him to safety.
4.
In another moment he was hastily filling the burned-out lamps from an oil supply
he had previously noticed, and when the room was bright again he looked about to see if he might
find a lantern for further exploration. For racked though he was with horror, his sense of grim
purpose was still uppermost; and he was firmly determined to leave no stone unturned in his search
for the hideous facts behind Charles Ward’s bizarre madness. Failing to find a lantern, he
chose the smallest of the lamps to carry; also filling his pockets with candles and matches, and
taking with him a gallon can of oil, which he proposed to keep for reserve use in whatever hidden
laboratory he might uncover beyond the terrible open space with its unclean altar and nameless
covered wells. To traverse that space again would require his utmost fortitude, but he knew it must
be done. Fortunately neither the frightful altar nor the opened shaft was near the vast
cell-indented wall which bounded the cavern area, and whose black mysterious archways would form
the next goals of a logical search.
So Willett went back to that great pillared hall of stench and anguished howling;
turning down his lamp to avoid any distant glimpse of the hellish altar, or of the uncovered pit
with the pierced stone slab beside it. Most of the black doorways led merely to small chambers,
some vacant and some evidently used as storerooms; and in several of the latter he saw some very
curious accumulations of various objects. One was packed with rotting and dust-draped bales of
spare clothing, and the explorer thrilled when he saw that it was unmistakably the clothing of a
century and a half before. In another room he found numerous odds and ends of modern clothing, as
if gradual provisions were being made to equip a large body of men. But what he disliked most of
all were the huge copper vats which occasionally appeared; these, and the sinister incrustations
upon them. He liked them even less than the weirdly figured leaden bowls whose rims retained such
obnoxious deposits and around which clung repellent odours perceptible above even the general
noisomeness of the crypt. When he had completed about half the entire circuit of the wall he found
another corridor like that from which he had come, and out of which many doors opened. This he
proceeded to investigate; and after entering three rooms of medium size and of no significant
contents, he came at last to a large oblong apartment whose business-like tanks and tables,
furnaces and modern instruments, occasional books and endless shelves of jars and bottles
proclaimed it indeed the long-sought laboratory of Charles Ward—and no doubt of old Joseph
Curwen before him.
After lighting the three lamps which he found filled and ready, Dr. Willett
examined the place and all its appurtenances with the keenest interest; noting from the relative
quantities of various reagents on the shelves that young Ward’s dominant concern must have
been with some branch of organic chemistry. On the whole, little could be learned from the
scientific ensemble, which included a gruesome-looking dissecting table; so that the room was
really rather a disappointment. Among the books was a tattered old copy of Borellus in
black-letter, and it was weirdly interesting to note that Ward had underlined the same passage
whose marking had so perturbed good Mr. Merritt at Curwen’s farmhouse more than a century and
a half before. That older copy, of course, must have perished along with the rest of Curwen’s
occult library in the final raid. Three archways opened off the laboratory, and these the doctor
proceeded to sample in turn. From his cursory survey he saw that two led merely to small
storerooms; but these he canvassed with care, remarking the piles of coffins in various stages of
damage and shuddering violently at two or three of the few coffin-plates he could decipher. There
was much clothing also stored in these rooms, and several new and tightly nailed boxes which he did
not stop to investigate. Most interesting of all, perhaps, were some odd bits which he judged to be
fragments of old Joseph Curwen’s laboratory appliances. These had suffered damage at the
hands of the raiders, but were still partly recognisable as the chemical paraphernalia of the
Georgian period.
The third archway led to a very sizeable chamber entirely lined with shelves and
having in the centre a table bearing two lamps. These lamps Willett lighted, and in their brilliant
glow studied the endless shelving which surrounded him. Some of the upper levels were wholly
vacant, but most of the space was filled with small odd-looking leaden jars of two general types;
one tall and without handles like a Grecian lekythos or oil-jug, and the other with a single handle
and proportioned like a Phaleron jug. All had metal stoppers, and were covered with
peculiar-looking symbols moulded in low relief. In a moment the doctor noticed that these jugs were
classified with great rigidity; all the lekythoi being on one side of the room with a large wooden
sign reading “Custodes” above them, and all the Phalerons on the other, correspondingly
labelled with a sign reading “Materia”. Each of the jars or jugs, except some on the
upper shelves that turned out to be vacant, bore a cardboard tag with a number apparently referring
to a catalogue; and Willett resolved to look for the latter presently. For the moment, however, he
was more interested in the nature of the array as a whole; and experimentally opened several of the
lekythoi and Phalerons at random with a view to a rough generalisation. The result was invariable.
Both types of jar contained a small quantity of a single kind of substance; a fine dusty powder of
very light weight and of many shades of dull, neutral colour. To the colours which formed the only
point of variation there was no apparent method of disposal; and no distinction between what
occurred in the lekythoi and what occurred in the Phalerons. A bluish-grey powder might be by the
side of a pinkish-white one, and any one in a Phaleron might have its exact counterpart in a
lekythos. The most individual feature about the powders was their non-adhesiveness. Willett would
pour one into his hand, and upon returning it to its jug would find that no residue whatever
remained on its palm.
The meaning of the two signs puzzled him, and he wondered why this battery of
chemicals was separated so radically from those in glass jars on the shelves of the laboratory
proper. “Custodes”, “Materia”; that was the Latin for “Guards”
and “Materials”, respectively—and then there came a flash of memory as to where
he had seen that word “Guards” before in connexion with this dreadful mystery. It was,
of course, in the recent letter to Dr. Allen purporting to be from old Edward Hutchinson; and the
phrase had read: “There was no Neede to keep the Guards in Shape and eat’g off their
Heads, and it made Much to be founde in Case of Trouble, as you too welle knowe.” What did
this signify? But wait—was there not still another reference to “guards”
in this matter which he had failed wholly to recall when reading the Hutchinson letter? Back in the
old non-secretive days Ward had told him of the Eleazar Smith diary recording the spying of Smith
and Weeden on the Curwen farm, and in that dreadful chronicle there had been a mention of
conversations overheard before the old wizard betook himself wholly beneath the earth. There had
been, Smith and Weeden insisted, terrible colloquies wherein figured Curwen, certain captives of
his, and the guards of those captives. Those guards, according to Hutchinson or his avatar,
had ‘eaten their heads off’, so that now Dr. Allen did not keep them in shape.
And if not in shape, how save as the “salts” to which it appears this wizard
band was engaged in reducing as many human bodies or skeletons as they could?
So that was what these lekythoi contained; the monstrous fruit of
unhallowed rites and deeds, presumably won or cowed to such submission as to help, when called up
by some hellish incantation, in the defence of their blasphemous master or the questioning of those
who were not so willing? Willett shuddered at the thought of what he had been pouring in and out of
his hands, and for a moment felt an impulse to flee in panic from that cavern of hideous shelves
with their silent and perhaps watching sentinels. Then he thought of the
“Materia”—in the myriad Phaleron jugs on the other side of the room. Salts
too—and if not the salts of “guards”, then the salts of what? God! Could it be
possible that here lay the mortal relics of half the titan thinkers of all the ages; snatched by
supreme ghouls from crypts where the world thought them safe, and subject to the beck and call of
madmen who sought to drain their knowledge for some still wilder end whose ultimate effect would
concern, as poor Charles had hinted in his frantic note, ‘all civilisation, all natural law,
perhaps even the fate of the solar system and the universe’? And Marinus Bicknell Willett had
sifted their dust through his hands!
Then he noticed a small door at the farther end of the room, and calmed himself
enough to approach it and examine the crude sign chiselled above. It was only a symbol, but it
filled him with vague spiritual dread; for a morbid, dreaming friend of his had once drawn it on
paper and told him a few of the things it means in the dark abyss of sleep. It was the sign of
Koth, that dreamers see fixed above the archway of a certain black tower standing alone in
twilight—and Willett did not like what his friend Randolph Carter had said of its powers.
But a moment later he forgot the sign as he recognised a new acrid odour in the stench-filled air.
This was a chemical rather than animal smell, and came clearly from the room beyond the door. And
it was, unmistakably, the same odour which had saturated Charles Ward’s clothing on the day
the doctors had taken him away. So it was here that the youth had been interrupted by the final
summons? He was wiser than old Joseph Curwen, for he had not resisted. Willett, boldly determined
to penetrate every wonder and nightmare this nether realm might contain, seized the small lamp and
crossed the threshold. A wave of nameless fright rolled out to meet him, but he yielded to no whim
and deferred to no intuition. There was nothing alive here to harm him, and he would not be stayed
in his piercing of the eldritch cloud which engulfed his patient.
The room beyond the door was of medium size, and had no furniture save a table, a
single chair, and two groups of curious machines with clamps and wheels, which Willett recognised
after a moment as mediaeval instruments of torture. On one side of the door stood a rack of savage
whips, above which were some shelves bearing empty rows of shallow pedestalled cups of lead shaped
like Grecian kylikes. On the other side was the table; with a powerful Argand lamp, a pad and
pencil, and two of the stoppered lekythoi from the shelves outside set down at irregular places as
if temporarily or in haste. Willett lighted the lamp and looked carefully at the pad, to see what
notes young Ward might have been jotting down when interrupted; but found nothing more intelligible
than the following disjointed fragments in that crabbed Curwen chirography, which shed no light on
the case as a whole:
“B. dy’d not. Escap’d into walls and founde Place below.
“Saw olde V. saye ye Sabaoth and learnt ye Way.
“Rais’d Yog-Sothoth thrice and was ye nexte Day
deliver’d.
“F. soughte to wipe out all know’g howe to raise Those from
Outside.”
As the strong Argand blaze lit up the entire chamber the doctor saw that the wall
opposite the door, between the two groups of torturing appliances in the corners, was covered with
pegs from which hung a set of shapeless-looking robes of a rather dismal yellowish-white. But far
more interesting were the two vacant walls, both of which were thickly covered with mystic symbols
and formulae roughly chiselled in the smooth dressed stone. The damp floor also bore marks of
carving; and with but little difficulty Willett deciphered a huge pentagram in the centre, with a
plain circle about three feet wide half way between this and each corner. In one of these four
circles, near where a yellowish robe had been flung carelessly down, there stood a shallow kylix of
the sort found on the shelves above the whip-rack; and just outside the periphery was one of the
Phaleron jugs from the shelves in the other room, its tag numbered 118. This was unstoppered, and
proved upon inspection to be empty; but the explorer saw with a shiver that the kylix was not.
Within its shallow area, and saved from scattering only by the absence of wind in this sequestered
cavern, lay a small amount of a dry, dull-greenish efflorescent powder which must have belonged in
the jug; and Willett almost reeled at the implications that came sweeping over him as he correlated
little by little the several elements and antecedents of the scene. The whips and the instruments
of torture, the dust or salts from the jug of “Materia”, the two lekythoi from the
“Custodes” shelf, the robes, the formulae on the walls, the notes on the pad, the hints
from letters and legends, and the thousand glimpses, doubts, and suppositions which had come to
torment the friends and parents of Charles Ward—all these engulfed the doctor in a tidal wave
of horror as he looked at that dry greenish powder outspread in the pedestalled leaden kylix on the
floor.
With an effort, however, Willett pulled himself together and began studying the
formulae chiselled on the walls. From the stained and incrusted letters it was obvious that they
were carved in Joseph Curwen’s time, and their text was such as to be vaguely familiar to one
who had read much Curwen material or delved extensively into the history of magic. One the doctor
clearly recognised as what Mrs. Ward heard her son chanting on that ominous Good Friday a year
before, and what an authority had told him was a very terrible invocation addressed to secret gods
outside the normal spheres. It was not spelled here exactly as Mrs. Ward had set it down from
memory, nor yet as the authority had shewn it to him in the forbidden pages of “Eliphas
Levi”; but its identity was unmistakable, and such words as Sabaoth, Metraton,
Almousin, and Zariatnatmik sent a shudder of fright through the searcher who had seen
and felt so much of cosmic abomination just around the corner.
This was on the left-hand wall as one entered the room. The right-hand wall was no
less thickly inscribed, and Willett felt a start of recognition as he came upon the pair of
formulae so frequently occurring in the recent notes in the library. They were, roughly speaking,
the same; with the ancient symbols of “Dragon’s Head” and “Dragon’s
Tail” heading them as in Ward’s scribblings. But the spelling differed quite widely
from that of the modern versions, as if old Curwen had had a different way of recording sound, or
as if later study had evolved more powerful and perfected variants of the invocations in question.
The doctor tried to reconcile the chiselled version with the one which still ran persistently in
his head, and found it hard to do. Where the script he had memorised began “Y’ai
’ng’ngah, Yog-Sothoth”, this epigraph started out as “Aye, engengah,
Yogge-Sothotha”; which to his mind would seriously interfere with the syllabification of
the second word.
Ground as the later text was into his consciousness, the discrepancy disturbed
him; and he found himself chanting the first of the formulae aloud in an effort to square the sound
he conceived with the letters he found carved. Weird and menacing in that abyss of antique
blasphemy rang his voice; its accents keyed to a droning sing-song either through the spell of the
past and the unknown, or through the hellish example of that dull, godless wail from the pits whose
inhuman cadences rose and fell rhythmically in the distance through the stench and the
darkness.
“Y’AI ’NG’NGAH,
YOG-SOTHOTH
H’EE—L’GEB
F’AI THRODOG
UAAAH!”
But what was this cold wind which had sprung into life at the very outset of the
chant? The lamps were sputtering woefully, and the gloom grew so dense that the letters on the wall
nearly faded from sight. There was smoke, too, and an acrid odour which quite drowned out the
stench from the far-away wells; an odour like that he had smelt before, yet infinitely stronger and
more pungent. He turned from the inscriptions to face the room with its bizarre contents, and saw
that the kylix on the floor, in which the ominous efflorescent powder had lain, was giving forth a
cloud of thick, greenish-black vapour of surprising volume and opacity. That powder—Great
God! it had come from the shelf of “Materia”—what was it doing now, and what had
started it? The formula he had been chanting—the first of the pair—Dragon’s Head,
ascending node—Blessed Saviour, could it be. . . .
The doctor reeled, and through his head raced wildly disjointed scraps from all he
had seen, heard, and read of the frightful case of Joseph Curwen and Charles Dexter Ward. “I
say to you againe, doe not call up Any that you can not put downe. . . . Have ye Wordes for laying at all times readie, and stopp not to be sure when
there is any Doubte of Whom you have. . . . Three Talkes with What was
therein inhum’d. . . .” Mercy of Heaven, what is that shape
behind the parting smoke?
5.
Marinus Bicknell Willett has no hope that any part of his tale will be believed
except by certain sympathetic friends, hence he has made no attempt to tell it beyond his most
intimate circle. Only a few outsiders have ever heard it repeated, and of these the majority laugh
and remark that the doctor surely is getting old. He has been advised to take a long vacation and
to shun future cases dealing with mental disturbance. But Mr. Ward knows that the veteran physician
speaks only a horrible truth. Did not he himself see the noisome aperture in the bungalow cellar?
Did not Willett send him home overcome and ill at eleven o’clock that portentous morning? Did
he not telephone the doctor in vain that evening, and again the next day, and had he not driven to
the bungalow itself on that following noon, finding his friend unconscious but unharmed on one of
the beds upstairs? Willett had been breathing stertorously, and opened his eyes slowly when Mr.
Ward gave him some brandy fetched from the car. Then he shuddered and screamed, crying out,
“That beard . . . those eyes. . . . God, who are
you?” A very strange thing to say to a trim, blue-eyed, clean-shaven gentleman whom he
had known from the latter’s boyhood.
In the bright noon sunlight the bungalow was unchanged since the previous morning.
Willett’s clothing bore no disarrangement beyond certain smudges and worn places at the
knees, and only a faint acrid odour reminded Mr. Ward of what he had smelt on his son that day he
was taken to the hospital. The doctor’s flashlight was missing, but his valise was safely
there, as empty as when he had brought it. Before indulging in any explanations, and obviously with
great moral effort, Willett staggered dizzily down to the cellar and tried the fateful platform
before the tubs. It was unyielding. Crossing to where he had left his yet unused tool satchel the
day before, he obtained a chisel and began to pry up the stubborn planks one by one. Underneath the
smooth concrete was still visible, but of any opening or perforation there was no longer a trace.
Nothing yawned this time to sicken the mystified father who had followed the doctor downstairs;
only the smooth concrete underneath the planks—no noisome well, no world of subterrene
horrors, no secret library, no Curwen papers, no nightmare pits of stench and howling, no
laboratory or shelves or chiselled formulae, no. . . . Dr. Willett turned pale, and
clutched at the younger man. “Yesterday,” he asked softly, “did you see it
here . . . and smell it?” And when Mr. Ward, himself transfixed with dread and
wonder, found strength to nod an affirmative, the physician gave a sound half a sigh and half a
gasp, and nodded in turn. “Then I will tell you,” he said.
So for an hour, in the sunniest room they could find upstairs, the physician
whispered his frightful tale to the wondering father. There was nothing to relate beyond the
looming up of that form when the greenish-black vapour from the kylix parted, and Willett was too
tired to ask himself what had really occurred. There were futile, bewildered head-shakings from
both men, and once Mr. Ward ventured a hushed suggestion, “Do you suppose it would be of any
use to dig?” The doctor was silent, for it seemed hardly fitting for any human brain to
answer when powers of unknown spheres had so vitally encroached on this side of the Great Abyss.
Again Mr. Ward asked, “But where did it go? It brought you here, you know, and it sealed up
the hole somehow.” And Willett again let silence answer for him.
But after all, this was not the final phase of the matter. Reaching for his
handkerchief before rising to leave, Dr. Willett’s fingers closed upon a piece of paper in
his pocket which had not been there before, and which was companioned by the candles and matches he
had seized in the vanished vault. It was a common sheet, torn obviously from the cheap pad in that
fabulous room of horror somewhere underground, and the writing upon it was that of an ordinary lead
pencil—doubtless the one which had lain beside the pad. It was folded very carelessly, and
beyond the faint acrid scent of the cryptic chamber bore no print or mark of any world but this.
But in the text itself it did indeed reek with wonder; for here was no script of any wholesome age,
but the laboured strokes of mediaeval darkness, scarcely legible to the laymen who now strained
over it, yet having combinations of symbols which seemed vaguely familiar. The briefly scrawled
message was this, and its mystery lent purpose to the shaken pair, who forthwith walked steadily
out to the Ward car and gave orders to be driven first to a quiet dining place and then to the John
Hay Library on the hill.

At the library it was easy to find good manuals of palaeography, and over these
the two men puzzled till the lights of evening shone out from the great chandelier. In the end they
found what was needed. The letters were indeed no fantastic invention, but the normal script of a
very dark period. They were the pointed Saxon minuscules of the eighth or ninth century A.D., and
brought with them memories of an uncouth time when under a fresh Christian veneer ancient faiths
and ancient rites stirred stealthily, and the pale moon of Britain looked sometimes on strange
deeds in the Roman ruins of Caerleon and Hexham, and by the towers along Hadrian’s crumbling
wall. The words were in such Latin as a barbarous age might remember—“Corvinus
necandus est. Cadaver aq(ua) forti dissolvendum, nec aliq(ui)d retinendum. Tace ut
potes.”—which may roughly be translated, “Curwen must be killed. The body
must be dissolved in aqua fortis, nor must anything be retained. Keep silence as best you are
able.”
Willett and Mr. Ward were mute and baffled. They had met the unknown, and found
that they lacked emotions to respond to it as they vaguely believed they ought. With Willett,
especially, the capacity for receiving fresh impressions of awe was well-nigh exhausted; and both
men sat still and helpless till the closing of the library forced them to leave. Then they drove
listlessly to the Ward mansion in Prospect Street, and talked to no purpose into the night. The
doctor rested toward morning, but did not go home. And he was still there Sunday noon when a
telephone message came from the detectives who had been assigned to look up Dr. Allen.
Mr. Ward, who was pacing nervously about in a dressing-gown, answered the call in
person; and told the men to come up early the next day when he heard their report was almost ready.
Both Willett and he were glad that this phase of the matter was taking form, for whatever the
origin of the strange minuscule message, it seemed certain that the “Curwen” who must
be destroyed could be no other than the bearded and spectacled stranger. Charles had feared this
man, and had said in the frantic note that he must be killed and dissolved in acid. Allen,
moreover, had been receiving letters from the strange wizards in Europe under the name of Curwen,
and palpably regarded himself as an avatar of the bygone necromancer. And now from a fresh and
unknown source had come a message saying that “Curwen” must be killed and dissolved in
acid. The linkage was too unmistakable to be factitious; and besides, was not Allen planning to
murder young Ward upon the advice of the creature called Hutchinson? Of course, the letter they had
seen had never reached the bearded stranger; but from its text they could see that Allen had
already formed plans for dealing with the youth if he grew too ‘squeamish’. Without
doubt, Allen must be apprehended; and even if the most drastic directions were not carried out, he
must be placed where he could inflict no harm upon Charles Ward.
That afternoon, hoping against hope to extract some gleam of information anent the
inmost mysteries from the only available one capable of giving it, the father and the doctor went
down the bay and called on young Charles at the hospital. Simply and gravely Willett told him all
he had found, and noticed how pale he turned as each description made certain the truth of the
discovery. The physician employed as much dramatic effect as he could, and watched for a wincing on
Charles’s part when he approached the matter of the covered pits and the nameless hybrids
within. But Ward did not wince. Willett paused, and his voice grew indignant as he spoke of how the
things were starving. He taxed the youth with shocking inhumanity, and shivered when only a
sardonic laugh came in reply. For Charles, having dropped as useless his pretence that the crypt
did not exist, seemed to see some ghastly jest in this affair; and chuckled hoarsely at something
which amused him. Then he whispered, in accents doubly terrible because of the cracked voice he
used, “Damn ’em, they do eat, but they don’t need to! That’s
the rare part! A month, you say, without food? Lud, Sir, you be modest! D’ye know, that was
the joke on poor old Whipple with his virtuous bluster! Kill everything off, would he? Why, damme,
he was half-deaf with the noise from Outside and never saw or heard aught from the wells! He never
dreamed they were there at all! Devil take ye, those cursed things have been howling down there
ever since Curwen was done for a hundred and fifty-seven years gone!”
But no more than this could Willett get from the youth. Horrified, yet almost
convinced against his will, he went on with his tale in the hope that some incident might startle
his auditor out of the mad composure he maintained. Looking at the youth’s face, the doctor
could not but feel a kind of terror at the changes which recent months had wrought. Truly, the boy
had drawn down nameless horrors from the skies. When the room with the formulae and the greenish
dust was mentioned, Charles shewed his first sign of animation. A quizzical look overspread his
face as he heard what Willett had read on the pad, and he ventured the mild statement that those
notes were old ones, of no possible significance to anyone not deeply initiated in the history of
magic. “But,” he added, “had you but known the words to bring up that which I had
out in the cup, you had not been here to tell me this. ’Twas Number 118, and I conceive you
would have shook had you looked it up in my list in t’other room. ’Twas never raised by
me, but I meant to have it up that day you came to invite me hither.”
Then Willett told of the formula he had spoken and of the greenish-black smoke
which had arisen; and as he did so he saw true fear dawn for the first time on Charles Ward’s
face. “It came, and you be here alive?” As Ward croaked the words his voice
seemed almost to burst free of its trammels and sink to cavernous abysses of uncanny resonance.
Willett, gifted with a flash of inspiration, believed he saw the situation, and wove into his reply
a caution from a letter he remembered. “No. 118, you say? But don’t forget that
stones are all changed now in nine grounds out of ten. You are never sure till you
question!” And then, without warning, he drew forth the minuscule message and flashed it
before the patient’s eyes. He could have wished no stronger result, for Charles Ward fainted
forthwith.
All this conversation, of course, had been conducted with the greatest secrecy
lest the resident alienists accuse the father and the physician of encouraging a madman in his
delusions. Unaided, too, Dr. Willett and Mr. Ward picked up the stricken youth and placed him on
the couch. In reviving, the patient mumbled many times of some word which he must get to Orne and
Hutchinson at once; so when his consciousness seemed fully back the doctor told him that of those
strange creatures at least one was his bitter enemy, and had given Dr. Allen advice for his
assassination. This revelation produced no visible effect, and before it was made the visitors
could see that their host had already the look of a hunted man. After that he would converse no
more, so Willett and the father departed presently; leaving behind a caution against the bearded
Allen, to which the youth only replied that this individual was very safely taken care of, and
could do no one any harm even if he wished. This was said with an almost evil chuckle very painful
to hear. They did not worry about any communications Charles might indite to that monstrous pair in
Europe, since they knew that the hospital authorities seized all outgoing mail for censorship and
would pass no wild or outré-looking missive.
There is, however, a curious sequel to the matter of Orne and Hutchinson, if such
indeed the exiled wizards were. Moved by some vague presentiment amidst the horrors of that period,
Willett arranged with an international press-cutting bureau for accounts of notable current crimes
and accidents in Prague and in eastern Transylvania; and after six months believed that he had
found two very significant things amongst the multifarious items he received and had translated.
One was the total wrecking of a house by night in the oldest quarter of Prague, and the
disappearance of the evil old man called Josef Nadek, who had dwelt in it alone ever since anyone
could remember. The other was a titan explosion in the Transylvanian mountains east of Rakus, and
the utter extirpation with all its inmates of the ill-regarded Castle Ferenczy, whose master was so
badly spoken of by peasants and soldiery alike that he would shortly have been summoned to
Bucharest for serious questioning had not this incident cut off a career already so long as to
antedate all common memory. Willett maintains that the hand which wrote those minuscules was able
to wield stronger weapons as well; and that while Curwen was left to him to dispose of, the writer
felt able to find and deal with Orne and Hutchinson itself. Of what their fate may have been the
doctor strives sedulously not to think.
6.
The following morning Dr. Willett hastened to the Ward home to be present when the
detectives arrived. Allen’s destruction or imprisonment—or Curwen’s, if one might
regard the tacit claim to reincarnation as valid—he felt must be accomplished at any cost,
and he communicated this conviction to Mr. Ward as they sat waiting for the men to come. They were
downstairs this time, for the upper parts of the house were beginning to be shunned because of a
peculiar nauseousness which hung indefinitely about; a nauseousness which the older servants
connected with some curse left by the vanished Curwen portrait.
At nine o’clock the three detectives presented themselves and immediately
delivered all that they had to say. They had not, regrettably enough, located the Brava Tony Gomes
as they had wished, nor had they found the least trace of Dr. Allen’s source or present
whereabouts; but they had managed to unearth a considerable number of local impressions and facts
concerning the reticent stranger. Allen had struck Pawtuxet people as a vaguely unnatural being,
and there was an universal belief that his thick Vandyke beard was either dyed or false—a
belief conclusively upheld by the finding of such a false beard, together with a pair of dark
glasses, in his room at the fateful bungalow. His voice, Mr. Ward could well testify from his one
telephone conversation, had a depth and hollowness that could not be forgotten; and his glance
seemed malign even through his smoked and horn-rimmed glasses. One shopkeeper, in the course of
negotiations, had seen a specimen of his handwriting and declared it was very queer and crabbed;
this being confirmed by pencilled notes of no clear meaning found in his room and identified by the
merchant. In connexion with the vampirism rumours of the preceding summer, a majority of the
gossips believed that Allen rather than Ward was the actual vampire. Statements were also obtained
from the officials who had visited the bungalow after the unpleasant incident of the motor truck
robbery. They had felt less of the sinister in Dr. Allen, but had recognised him as the dominant
figure in the queer shadowy cottage. The place had been too dark for them to observe him clearly,
but they would know him again if they saw him. His beard had looked odd, and they thought he had
some slight scar above his dark spectacled right eye. As for the detectives’ search of
Allen’s room, it yielded nothing definite save the beard and glasses, and several pencilled
notes in a crabbed writing which Willett at once saw was identical with that shared by the old
Curwen manuscripts and by the voluminous recent notes of young Ward found in the vanished catacombs
of horror.
Dr. Willett and Mr. Ward caught something of a profound, subtle, and insidious
cosmic fear from this data as it was gradually unfolded, and almost trembled in following up the
vague, mad thought which had simultaneously reached their minds. The false beard and
glasses—the crabbed Curwen penmanship—the old portrait and its tiny scar—and
the altered youth in the hospital with such a scar—that deep, hollow voice on the
telephone—was it not of this that Mr. Ward was reminded when his son barked forth those
pitiable tones to which he now claimed to be reduced? Who had ever seen Charles and Allen together?
Yes, the officials had once, but who later on? Was it not when Allen left that Charles suddenly
lost his growing fright and began to live wholly at the bungalow?
Curwen—Allen—Ward—in what blasphemous and abominable fusion had two ages and two
persons become involved? That damnable resemblance of the picture to Charles—had it not used
to stare and stare, and follow the boy around the room with its eyes? Why, too, did both Allen and
Charles copy Joseph Curwen’s handwriting, even when alone and off guard? And then the
frightful work of those people—the lost crypt of horrors that had aged the doctor overnight;
the starved monsters in the noisome pits; the awful formula which had yielded such nameless
results; the message in minuscules found in Willett’s pocket; the papers and the letters and
all the talk of graves and “salts” and discoveries—whither did everything lead?
In the end Mr. Ward did the most sensible thing. Steeling himself against any realisation of why he
did it, he gave the detectives an article to be shewn to such Pawtuxet shopkeepers as had seen the
portentous Dr. Allen. That article was a photograph of his luckless son, on which he now carefully
drew in ink the pair of heavy glasses and the black pointed beard which the men had brought from
Allen’s room.
For two hours he waited with the doctor in the oppressive house where fear and
miasma were slowly gathering as the empty panel in the upstairs library leered and leered and
leered. Then the men returned. Yes. The altered photograph was a very passable likeness of Dr.
Allen. Mr. Ward turned pale, and Willett wiped a suddenly dampened brow with his handkerchief.
Allen—Ward—Curwen—it was becoming too hideous for coherent thought. What had the
boy called out of the void, and what had it done to him? What, really, had happened from first to
last? Who was this Allen who sought to kill Charles as too ‘squeamish’, and why had his
destined victim said in the postscript to that frantic letter that he must be so completely
obliterated in acid? Why, too, had the minuscule message, of whose origin no one dared think, said
that “Curwen” must be likewise obliterated? What was the change, and when had
the final stage occurred? That day when his frantic note was received—he had been nervous all
the morning, then there was an alteration. He had slipped out unseen and swaggered boldly in past
the men hired to guard him. That was the time, when he was out. But no—had he not cried out
in terror as he entered his study—this very room? What had he found there? Or
wait—what had found him? That simulacrum which brushed boldly in without having been
seen to go—was that an alien shadow and a horror forcing itself upon a trembling figure which
had never gone out at all? Had not the butler spoken of queer noises?
Willett rang for the man and asked him some low-toned questions. It had, surely
enough, been a bad business. There had been noises—a cry, a gasp, a choking, and a sort of
clattering or creaking or thumping, or all of these. And Mr. Charles was not the same when he
stalked out without a word. The butler shivered as he spoke, and sniffed at the heavy air that blew
down from some open window upstairs. Terror had settled definitely upon the house, and only the
business-like detectives failed to imbibe a full measure of it. Even they were restless, for this
case had held vague elements in the background which pleased them not at all. Dr. Willett was
thinking deeply and rapidly, and his thoughts were terrible ones. Now and then he would almost
break into muttering as he ran over in his head a new, appalling, and increasingly conclusive chain
of nightmare happenings.
Then Mr. Ward made a sign that the conference was over, and everyone save him and
the doctor left the room. It was noon now, but shadows as of coming night seemed to engulf the
phantom-haunted mansion. Willett began talking very seriously to his host, and urged that he leave
a great deal of the future investigation to him. There would be, he predicted, certain obnoxious
elements which a friend could bear better than a relative. As family physician he must have a free
hand, and the first thing he required was a period alone and undisturbed in the abandoned library
upstairs, where the ancient overmantel had gathered about itself an aura of noisome horror more
intense than when Joseph Curwen’s features themselves glanced slyly down from the painted
panel.
Mr. Ward, dazed by the flood of grotesque morbidities and unthinkably maddening
suggestions that poured in upon him from every side, could only acquiesce; and half an hour later
the doctor was locked in the shunned room with the panelling from Olney Court. The father,
listening outside, heard fumbling sounds of moving and rummaging as the moments passed; and finally
a wrench and a creak, as if a tight cupboard door were being opened. Then there was a muffled cry,
a kind of snorting choke, and a hasty slamming of whatever had been opened. Almost at once the key
rattled and Willett appeared in the hall, haggard and ghastly, and demanding wood for the real
fireplace on the south wall of the room. The furnace was not enough, he said; and the electric log
had little practical use. Longing yet not daring to ask questions, Mr. Ward gave the requisite
orders and a man brought some stout pine logs, shuddering as he entered the tainted air of the
library to place them in the grate. Willett meanwhile had gone up to the dismantled laboratory and
brought down a few odds and ends not included in the moving of the July before. They were in a
covered basket, and Mr. Ward never saw what they were.
Then the doctor locked himself in the library once more, and by the clouds of
smoke which rolled down past the windows from the chimney it was known that he had lighted the
fire. Later, after a great rustling of newspapers, that odd wrench and creaking were heard again;
followed by a thumping which none of the eavesdroppers liked. Thereafter two suppressed cries of
Willett’s were heard, and hard upon these came a swishing rustle of indefinable hatefulness.
Finally the smoke that the wind beat down from the chimney grew very dark and acrid, and everyone
wished that the weather had spared them this choking and venomous inundation of peculiar fumes. Mr.
Ward’s head reeled, and the servants all clustered together in a knot to watch the horrible
black smoke swoop down. After an age of waiting the vapours seemed to lighten, and half-formless
sounds of scraping, sweeping, and other minor operations were heard behind the bolted door. And at
last, after the slamming of some cupboard within, Willett made his appearance—sad, pale, and
haggard, and bearing the cloth-draped basket he had taken from the upstairs laboratory. He had left
the window open, and into that once accursed room was pouring a wealth of pure, wholesome air to
mix with a queer new smell of disinfectants. The ancient overmantel still lingered; but it seemed
robbed of malignity now, and rose as calm and stately in its white panelling as if it had never
borne the picture of Joseph Curwen. Night was coming on, yet this time its shadows held no latent
fright, but only a gentle melancholy. Of what he had done the doctor would never speak. To Mr. Ward
he said, “I can answer no questions, but I will say that there are different kinds of magic.
I have made a great purgation, and those in this house will sleep the better for it.”
7.
That Dr. Willett’s “purgation” had been an ordeal almost as
nerve-racking in its way as his hideous wandering in the vanished crypt is shewn by the fact that
the elderly physician gave out completely as soon as he reached home that evening. For three days
he rested constantly in his room, though servants later muttered something about having heard him
after midnight on Wednesday, when the outer door softly opened and closed with phenomenal softness.
Servants’ imaginations, fortunately, are limited, else comment might have been excited by an
item in Thursday’s Evening Bulletin which ran as follows:
North End GhoulsActive Again

After a lull of ten months since the dastardly vandalism in the Weeden lot at the North Burial
Ground, a nocturnal prowler was glimpsed early this morning in the same cemetery by Robert Hart,
the night watchman. Happening to glance for a moment from his shelter at about 2 a.m., Hart
observed the glow of a lantern or pocket torch not far to the northwest, and upon opening the door
detected the figure of a man with a trowel very plainly silhouetted against a nearby electric
light. At once starting in pursuit, he saw the figure dart hurriedly toward the main entrance,
gaining the street and losing himself among the shadows before approach or capture was
possible.
Like the first of the ghouls active during the past year, this intruder had done
no real damage before detection. A vacant part of the Ward lot shewed signs of a little superficial
digging, but nothing even nearly the size of a grave had been attempted, and no previous grave had
been disturbed.
Hart, who cannot describe the prowler except as a small man probably having a full
beard, inclines to the view that all three of the digging incidents have a common source; but
police from the Second Station think otherwise on account of the savage nature of the second
incident, where an ancient coffin was removed and its headstone violently shattered.
The first of the incidents, in which it is thought an attempt to bury something
was frustrated, occurred a year ago last March, and has been attributed to bootleggers seeking a
cache. It is possible, says Sergt. Riley, that this third affair is of similar nature. Officers at
the Second Station are taking especial pains to capture the gang of miscreants responsible for
these repeated outrages.
All day Thursday Dr. Willett rested as if recuperating from something past or
nerving himself for something to come. In the evening he wrote a note to Mr. Ward, which was
delivered the next morning and which caused the half-dazed parent to ponder long and deeply. Mr.
Ward had not been able to go down to business since the shock of Monday with its baffling reports
and its sinister “purgation”, but he found something calming about the doctor’s
letter in spite of the despair it seemed to promise and the fresh mysteries it seemed to
evoke.
“10 Barnes St.,
Providence, R.I.,
April 12, 1928.

“Dear Theodore:—I feel that I must say a word to you before doing what I am going to do
tomorrow. It will conclude the terrible business we have been going through (for I feel that no
spade is ever likely to reach that monstrous place we know of), but I’m afraid it won’t
set your mind at rest unless I expressly assure you how very conclusive it is.
“You have known me ever since you were a small boy, so I think you will not
distrust me when I hint that some matters are best left undecided and unexplored. It is better that
you attempt no further speculation as to Charles’s case, and almost imperative that you tell
his mother nothing more than she already suspects. When I call on you tomorrow Charles will have
escaped. That is all which need remain in anyone’s mind. He was mad, and he escaped. You can
tell his mother gently and gradually about the mad part when you stop sending the typed notes in
his name. I’d advise you to join her in Atlantic City and take a rest yourself. God knows you
need one after this shock, as I do myself. I am going South for a while to calm down and brace
up.
“So don’t ask me any questions when I call. It may be that something
will go wrong, but I’ll tell you if it does. I don’t think it will. There will be
nothing more to worry about, for Charles will be very, very safe. He is now—safer than you
dream. You need hold no fears about Allen, and who or what he is. He forms as much a part of the
past as Joseph Curwen’s picture, and when I ring your doorbell you may feel certain that
there is no such person. And what wrote that minuscule message will never trouble you or
yours.
“But you must steel yourself to melancholy, and prepare your wife to do the
same. I must tell you frankly that Charles’s escape will not mean his restoration to you. He
has been afflicted with a peculiar disease, as you must realise from the subtle physical as well as
mental changes in him, and you must not hope to see him again. Have only this
consolation—that he was never a fiend or even truly a madman, but only an eager, studious,
and curious boy whose love of mystery and of the past was his undoing. He stumbled on things no
mortal ought ever to know, and reached back through the years as no one ever should reach; and
something came out of those years to engulf him.
“And now comes the matter in which I must ask you to trust me most of all.
For there will be, indeed, no uncertainty about Charles’s fate. In about a year, say, you can
if you wish devise a suitable account of the end; for the boy will be no more. You can put up a
stone in your lot at the North Burial Ground exactly ten feet west of your father’s and
facing the same way, and that will mark the true resting-place of your son. Nor need you fear that
it will mark any abnormality or changeling. The ashes in that grave will be those of your own
unaltered bone and sinew—of the real Charles Dexter Ward whose mind you watched from
infancy—the real Charles with the olive-mark on his hip and without the black witch-mark on
his chest or the pit on his forehead. The Charles who never did actual evil, and who will have paid
with his life for his ‘squeamishness’.
“That is all. Charles will have escaped, and a year from now you can put up
his stone. Do not question me tomorrow. And believe that the honour of your ancient family remains
untainted now, as it has been at all times in the past.
“With profoundest sympathy, and exhortations to fortitude, calmness, and
resignation, I am ever
Sincerely your friend,
Marinus B. Willett”
So on the morning of Friday, April 13, 1928, Marinus Bicknell Willett visited the
room of Charles Dexter Ward at Dr. Waite’s private hospital on Conanicut Island. The youth,
though making no attempt to evade his caller, was in a sullen mood; and seemed disinclined to open
the conversation which Willett obviously desired. The doctor’s discovery of the crypt and his
monstrous experience therein had of course created a new source of embarrassment, so that both
hesitated perceptibly after the interchange of a few strained formalities. Then a new element of
constraint crept in, as Ward seemed to read behind the doctor’s mask-like face a terrible
purpose which had never been there before. The patient quailed, conscious that since the last visit
there had been a change whereby the solicitous family physician had given place to the ruthless and
implacable avenger.
Ward actually turned pale, and the doctor was the first to speak.
“More,” he said, “has been found out, and I must warn you fairly that a reckoning
is due.”
“Digging again, and coming upon more poor starving pets?” was the
ironic reply. It was evident that the youth meant to shew bravado to the last.
“No,” Willett slowly rejoined, “this time I did not have to dig.
We have had men looking up Dr. Allen, and they found the false beard and spectacles in the
bungalow.”
“Excellent,” commented the disquieted host in an effort to be wittily
insulting, “and I trust they proved more becoming than the beard and glasses you now have
on!”
“They would become you very well,” came the even and studied response,
“as indeed they seem to have done.”
As Willett said this, it almost seemed as though a cloud passed over the sun;
though there was no change in the shadows on the floor. Then Ward ventured:
“And is this what asks so hotly for a reckoning? Suppose a man does find it
now and then useful to be twofold?”
“No,” said Willett gravely, “again you are wrong. It is no
business of mine if any man seeks duality; provided he has any right to exist at all, and
provided he does not destroy what called him out of space.”
Ward now started violently. “Well, Sir, what have ye found, and what
d’ye want with me?”
The doctor let a little time elapse before replying, as if choosing his words for
an effective answer.
“I have found,” he finally intoned, “something in a cupboard
behind an ancient overmantel where a picture once was, and I have burned it and buried the ashes
where the grave of Charles Dexter Ward ought to be.”
The madman choked and sprang from the chair in which he had been sitting:
“Damn ye, who did ye tell—and who’ll believe it was he after
these full two months, with me alive? What d’ye mean to do?”
Willett, though a small man, actually took on a kind of judicial majesty as he
calmed the patient with a gesture.
“I have told no one. This is no common case—it is a madness out of
time and a horror from beyond the spheres which no police or lawyers or courts or alienists could
ever fathom or grapple with. Thank God some chance has left inside me the spark of imagination,
that I might not go astray in thinking out this thing. You cannot deceive me, Joseph Curwen, for
I know that your accursed magic is true!
“I know how you wove the spell that brooded outside the years and fastened
on your double and descendant; I know how you drew him into the past and got him to raise you up
from your detestable grave; I know how he kept you hidden in his laboratory while you studied
modern things and roved abroad as a vampire by night, and how you later shewed yourself in beard
and glasses that no one might wonder at your godless likeness to him; I know what you resolved to
do when he balked at your monstrous rifling of the world’s tombs, and at what you planned
afterward, and I know how you did it.
“You left off your beard and glasses and fooled the guards around the house.
They thought it was he who went in, and they thought it was he who came out when you had strangled
and hidden him. But you hadn’t reckoned on the different contents of two minds. You were a
fool, Curwen, to fancy that a mere visual identity would be enough. Why didn’t you think of
the speech and the voice and the handwriting? It hasn’t worked, you see, after all. You know
better than I who or what wrote that message in minuscules, but I will warn you it was not written
in vain. There are abominations and blasphemies which must be stamped out, and I believe that the
writer of those words will attend to Orne and Hutchinson. One of those creatures wrote you once,
‘do not call up any that you can not put down’. You were undone once before, perhaps in
that very way, and it may be that your own evil magic will undo you all again. Curwen, a man
can’t tamper with Nature beyond certain limits, and every horror you have woven will rise up
to wipe you out.”
But here the doctor was cut short by a convulsive cry from the creature before
him. Hopelessly at bay, weaponless, and knowing that any show of physical violence would bring a
score of attendants to the doctor’s rescue, Joseph Curwen had recourse to his one ancient
ally, and began a series of cabbalistic motions with his forefingers as his deep, hollow voice, now
unconcealed by feigned hoarseness, bellowed out the opening words of a terrible formula.
“PER ADONAI ELOIM, ADONAI JEHOVA, ADONAI SABAOTH,
METRATON. . . .”
But Willett was too quick for him. Even as the dogs in the yard outside began to
howl, and even as a chill wind sprang suddenly up from the bay, the doctor commenced the solemn and
measured intonation of that which he had meant all along to recite. An eye for an eye—magic
for magic—let the outcome shew how well the lesson of the abyss had been learned! So in a
clear voice Marinus Bicknell Willett began the second of that pair of formulae whose first
had raised the writer of those minuscules—the cryptic invocation whose heading was the
Dragon’s Tail, sign of the descending node—
“OGTHROD AI’F
GEB’L—EE’H
YOG-SOTHOTH
‘NGAH’NG AI’Y
ZHRO!”
At the very first word from Willett’s mouth the previously commenced formula
of the patient stopped short. Unable to speak, the monster made wild motions with his arms until
they too were arrested. When the awful name of Yog-Sothoth was uttered, the hideous change
began. It was not merely a dissolution, but rather a transformation or
recapitulation; and Willett shut his eyes lest he faint before the rest of the incantation
could be pronounced.
But he did not faint, and that man of unholy centuries and forbidden secrets never
troubled the world again. The madness out of time had subsided, and the case of Charles Dexter Ward
was closed. Opening his eyes before staggering out of that room of horror, Dr. Willett saw that
what he had kept in memory had not been kept amiss. There had, as he had predicted, been no need
for acids. For like his accursed picture a year before, Joseph Curwen now lay scattered on the
floor as a thin coating of fine bluish-grey dust.

The Colour out of Space


West of Arkham the hills rise wild, and there are valleys with deep woods that no axe has ever
cut. There are dark narrow glens where the trees slope fantastically, and where thin brooklets
trickle without ever having caught the glint of sunlight. On the gentler slopes there are farms,
ancient and rocky, with squat, moss-coated cottages brooding eternally over old New England
secrets in the lee of great ledges; but these are all vacant now, the wide chimneys crumbling
and the shingled sides bulging perilously beneath low gambrel roofs.
The old folk have gone away, and foreigners do not like to live there. French-Canadians
have tried it, Italians have tried it, and the Poles have come and departed. It is not because
of anything that can be seen or heard or handled, but because of something that is imagined.
The place is not good for the imagination, and does not bring restful dreams at night. It must
be this which keeps the foreigners away, for old Ammi Pierce has never told them of anything
he recalls from the strange days. Ammi, whose head has been a little queer for years, is the
only one who still remains, or who ever talks of the strange days; and he dares to do this because
his house is so near the open fields and the travelled roads around Arkham.
There was once a road over the hills and through the valleys, that ran straight
where the blasted heath is now; but people ceased to use it and a new road was laid curving
far toward the south. Traces of the old one can still be found amidst the weeds of a returning
wilderness, and some of them will doubtless linger even when half the hollows are flooded for
the new reservoir. Then the dark woods will be cut down and the blasted heath will slumber far
below blue waters whose surface will mirror the sky and ripple in the sun. And the secrets of
the strange days will be one with the deep’s secrets; one with the hidden lore of old
ocean, and all the mystery of primal earth.
When I went into the hills and vales to survey for the new reservoir they told
me the place was evil. They told me this in Arkham, and because that is a very old town full
of witch legends I thought the evil must be something which grandams had whispered to children
through centuries. The name “blasted heath” seemed to me very odd and theatrical,
and I wondered how it had come into the folklore of a Puritan people. Then I saw that dark westward
tangle of glens and slopes for myself, and ceased to wonder at anything besides its own elder
mystery. It was morning when I saw it, but shadow lurked always there. The trees grew too thickly,
and their trunks were too big for any healthy New England wood. There was too much silence in
the dim alleys between them, and the floor was too soft with the dank moss and mattings of infinite
years of decay.
In the open spaces, mostly along the line of the old road, there were little
hillside farms; sometimes with all the buildings standing, sometimes with only one or two, and
sometimes with only a lone chimney or fast-filling cellar. Weeds and briers reigned, and furtive
wild things rustled in the undergrowth. Upon everything was a haze of restlessness and oppression;
a touch of the unreal and the grotesque, as if some vital element of perspective or chiaroscuro
were awry. I did not wonder that the foreigners would not stay, for this was no region to sleep
in. It was too much like a landscape of Salvator Rosa; too much like some forbidden woodcut
in a tale of terror.
But even all this was not so bad as the blasted heath. I knew it the moment
I came upon it at the bottom of a spacious valley; for no other name could fit such a thing,
or any other thing fit such a name. It was as if the poet had coined the phrase from having
seen this one particular region. It must, I thought as I viewed it, be the outcome of a fire;
but why had nothing new ever grown over those five acres of grey desolation that sprawled open
to the sky like a great spot eaten by acid in the woods and fields? It lay largely to the north
of the ancient road line, but encroached a little on the other side. I felt an odd reluctance
about approaching, and did so at last only because my business took me through and past it.
There was no vegetation of any kind on that broad expanse, but only a fine grey dust or ash
which no wind seemed ever to blow about. The trees near it were sickly and stunted, and many
dead trunks stood or lay rotting at the rim. As I walked hurriedly by I saw the tumbled bricks
and stones of an old chimney and cellar on my right, and the yawning black maw of an abandoned
well whose stagnant vapours played strange tricks with the hues of the sunlight. Even the long,
dark woodland climb beyond seemed welcome in contrast, and I marvelled no more at the frightened
whispers of Arkham people. There had been no house or ruin near; even in the old days the place
must have been lonely and remote. And at twilight, dreading to repass that ominous spot, I walked
circuitously back to the town by the curving road on the south. I vaguely wished some clouds
would gather, for an odd timidity about the deep skyey voids above had crept into my soul.
In the evening I asked old people in Arkham about the blasted heath, and what
was meant by that phrase “strange days” which so many evasively muttered. I could
not, however, get any good answers, except that all the mystery was much more recent than I
had dreamed. It was not a matter of old legendry at all, but something within the lifetime of
those who spoke. It had happened in the ’eighties, and a family had disappeared or was
killed. Speakers would not be exact; and because they all told me to pay no attention to old
Ammi Pierce’s crazy tales, I sought him out the next morning, having heard that he lived
alone in the ancient tottering cottage where the trees first begin to get very thick. It was
a fearsomely archaic place, and had begun to exude the faint miasmal odour which clings about
houses that have stood too long. Only with persistent knocking could I rouse the aged man, and
when he shuffled timidly to the door I could tell he was not glad to see me. He was not so feeble
as I had expected; but his eyes drooped in a curious way, and his unkempt clothing and white
beard made him seem very worn and dismal. Not knowing just how he could best be launched on
his tales, I feigned a matter of business; told him of my surveying, and asked vague questions
about the district. He was far brighter and more educated than I had been led to think, and
before I knew it had grasped quite as much of the subject as any man I had talked with in Arkham.
He was not like other rustics I had known in the sections where reservoirs were to be. From
him there were no protests at the miles of old wood and farmland to be blotted out, though perhaps
there would have been had not his home lain outside the bounds of the future lake. Relief was
all that he shewed; relief at the doom of the dark ancient valleys through which he had roamed
all his life. They were better under water now—better under water since the strange days.
And with this opening his husky voice sank low, while his body leaned forward and his right
forefinger began to point shakily and impressively.
It was then that I heard the story, and as the rambling voice scraped and whispered
on I shivered again and again despite the summer day. Often I had to recall the speaker from
ramblings, piece out scientific points which he knew only by a fading parrot memory of professors’
talk, or bridge over gaps where his sense of logic and continuity broke down. When he was done
I did not wonder that his mind had snapped a trifle, or that the folk of Arkham would not speak
much of the blasted heath. I hurried back before sunset to my hotel, unwilling to have the stars
come out above me in the open; and the next day returned to Boston to give up my position. I
could not go into that dim chaos of old forest and slope again, or face another time that grey
blasted heath where the black well yawned deep beside the tumbled bricks and stones. The reservoir
will soon be built now, and all those elder secrets will be safe forever under watery fathoms.
But even then I do not believe I would like to visit that country by night—at least, not
when the sinister stars are out; and nothing could bribe me to drink the new city water of Arkham.
It all began, old Ammi said, with the meteorite. Before that time there had
been no wild legends at all since the witch trials, and even then these western woods were not
feared half so much as the small island in the Miskatonic where the devil held court beside
a curious stone altar older than the Indians. These were not haunted woods, and their fantastic
dusk was never terrible till the strange days. Then there had come that white noontide cloud,
that string of explosions in the air, and that pillar of smoke from the valley far in the wood.
And by night all Arkham had heard of the great rock that fell out of the sky and bedded itself
in the ground beside the well at the Nahum Gardner place. That was the house which had stood
where the blasted heath was to come—the trim white Nahum Gardner house amidst its fertile
gardens and orchards.
Nahum had come to town to tell people about the stone, and had dropped in at
Ammi Pierce’s on the way. Ammi was forty then, and all the queer things were fixed very
strongly in his mind. He and his wife had gone with the three professors from Miskatonic University
who hastened out the next morning to see the weird visitor from unknown stellar space, and had
wondered why Nahum had called it so large the day before. It had shrunk, Nahum said as he pointed
out the big brownish mound above the ripped earth and charred grass near the archaic well-sweep
in his front yard; but the wise men answered that stones do not shrink. Its heat lingered persistently,
and Nahum declared it had glowed faintly in the night. The professors tried it with a geologist’s
hammer and found it was oddly soft. It was, in truth, so soft as to be almost plastic; and they
gouged rather than chipped a specimen to take back to the college for testing. They took it
in an old pail borrowed from Nahum’s kitchen, for even the small piece refused to grow
cool. On the trip back they stopped at Ammi’s to rest, and seemed thoughtful when Mrs.
Pierce remarked that the fragment was growing smaller and burning the bottom of the pail. Truly,
it was not large, but perhaps they had taken less than they thought.
The day after that—all this was in June of ’82—the professors
had trooped out again in a great excitement. As they passed Ammi’s they told him what
queer things the specimen had done, and how it had faded wholly away when they put it in a glass
beaker. The beaker had gone, too, and the wise men talked of the strange stone’s affinity
for silicon. It had acted quite unbelievably in that well-ordered laboratory; doing nothing
at all and shewing no occluded gases when heated on charcoal, being wholly negative in the borax
bead, and soon proving itself absolutely non-volatile at any producible temperature, including
that of the oxy-hydrogen blowpipe. On an anvil it appeared highly malleable, and in the dark
its luminosity was very marked. Stubbornly refusing to grow cool, it soon had the college in
a state of real excitement; and when upon heating before the spectroscope it displayed shining
bands unlike any known colours of the normal spectrum there was much breathless talk of new
elements, bizarre optical properties, and other things which puzzled men of science are wont
to say when faced by the unknown.
Hot as it was, they tested it in a crucible with all the proper reagents. Water
did nothing. Hydrochloric acid was the same. Nitric acid and even aqua regia merely hissed and
spattered against its torrid invulnerability. Ammi had difficulty in recalling all these things,
but recognised some solvents as I mentioned them in the usual order of use. There were ammonia
and caustic soda, alcohol and ether, nauseous carbon disulphide and a dozen others; but although
the weight grew steadily less as time passed, and the fragment seemed to be slightly cooling,
there was no change in the solvents to shew that they had attacked the substance at all. It
was a metal, though, beyond a doubt. It was magnetic, for one thing; and after its immersion
in the acid solvents there seemed to be faint traces of the Widmannstätten figures found
on meteoric iron. When the cooling had grown very considerable, the testing was carried on in
glass; and it was in a glass beaker that they left all the chips made of the original fragment
during the work. The next morning both chips and beaker were gone without trace, and only a
charred spot marked the place on the wooden shelf where they had been.
All this the professors told Ammi as they paused at his door, and once more
he went with them to see the stony messenger from the stars, though this time his wife did not
accompany him. It had now most certainly shrunk, and even the sober professors could not doubt
the truth of what they saw. All around the dwindling brown lump near the well was a vacant space,
except where the earth had caved in; and whereas it had been a good seven feet across the day
before, it was now scarcely five. It was still hot, and the sages studied its surface curiously
as they detached another and larger piece with hammer and chisel. They gouged deeply this time,
and as they pried away the smaller mass they saw that the core of the thing was not quite homogeneous.
They had uncovered what seemed to be the side of a large coloured globule imbedded
in the substance. The colour, which resembled some of the bands in the meteor’s strange
spectrum, was almost impossible to describe; and it was only by analogy that they called it
colour at all. Its texture was glossy, and upon tapping it appeared to promise both brittleness
and hollowness. One of the professors gave it a smart blow with a hammer, and it burst with
a nervous little pop. Nothing was emitted, and all trace of the thing vanished with the puncturing.
It left behind a hollow spherical space about three inches across, and all thought it probable
that others would be discovered as the enclosing substance wasted away.
Conjecture was vain; so after a futile attempt to find additional globules
by drilling, the seekers left again with their new specimen—which proved, however, as
baffling in the laboratory as its predecessor had been. Aside from being almost plastic, having
heat, magnetism, and slight luminosity, cooling slightly in powerful acids, possessing an unknown
spectrum, wasting away in air, and attacking silicon compounds with mutual destruction as a
result, it presented no identifying features whatsoever; and at the end of the tests the college
scientists were forced to own that they could not place it. It was nothing of this earth, but
a piece of the great outside; and as such dowered with outside properties and obedient to outside
laws.
That night there was a thunderstorm, and when the professors went out to Nahum’s
the next day they met with a bitter disappointment. The stone, magnetic as it had been, must
have had some peculiar electrical property; for it had “drawn the lightning”, as
Nahum said, with a singular persistence. Six times within an hour the farmer saw the lightning
strike the furrow in the front yard, and when the storm was over nothing remained but a ragged
pit by the ancient well-sweep, half-choked with caved-in earth. Digging had borne no fruit,
and the scientists verified the fact of the utter vanishment. The failure was total; so that
nothing was left to do but go back to the laboratory and test again the disappearing fragment
left carefully cased in lead. That fragment lasted a week, at the end of which nothing of
value had been learned of it. When it had gone, no residue was left behind, and in time the
professors felt scarcely sure they had indeed seen with waking eyes that cryptic vestige of
the fathomless gulfs outside; that lone, weird message from other universes and other realms
of matter, force, and entity.
As was natural, the Arkham papers made much of the incident with its collegiate
sponsoring, and sent reporters to talk with Nahum Gardner and his family. At least one Boston
daily also sent a scribe, and Nahum quickly became a kind of local celebrity. He was a lean,
genial person of about fifty, living with his wife and three sons on the pleasant farmstead
in the valley. He and Ammi exchanged visits frequently, as did their wives; and Ammi had nothing
but praise for him after all these years. He seemed slightly proud of the notice his place had
attracted, and talked often of the meteorite in the succeeding weeks. That July and August were
hot, and Nahum worked hard at his haying in the ten-acre pasture across Chapman’s Brook;
his rattling wain wearing deep ruts in the shadowy lanes between. The labour tired him more
than it had in other years, and he felt that age was beginning to tell on him.
Then fell the time of fruit and harvest. The pears and apples slowly ripened,
and Nahum vowed that his orchards were prospering as never before. The fruit was growing to
phenomenal size and unwonted gloss, and in such abundance that extra barrels were ordered to
handle the future crop. But with the ripening came sore disappointment; for of all that gorgeous
array of specious lusciousness not one single jot was fit to eat. Into the fine flavour of the
pears and apples had crept a stealthy bitterness and sickishness, so that even the smallest
of bites induced a lasting disgust. It was the same with the melons and tomatoes, and Nahum
sadly saw that his entire crop was lost. Quick to connect events, he declared that the meteorite
had poisoned the soil, and thanked heaven that most of the other crops were in the upland lot
along the road.
Winter came early, and was very cold. Ammi saw Nahum less often than usual,
and observed that he had begun to look worried. The rest of his family, too, seemed to have
grown taciturn; and were far from steady in their churchgoing or their attendance at the various
social events of the countryside. For this reserve or melancholy no cause could be found, though
all the household confessed now and then to poorer health and a feeling of vague disquiet. Nahum
himself gave the most definite statement of anyone when he said he was disturbed about certain
footprints in the snow. They were the usual winter prints of red squirrels, white rabbits, and
foxes, but the brooding farmer professed to see something not quite right about their nature
and arrangement. He was never specific, but appeared to think that they were not as characteristic
of the anatomy and habits of squirrels and rabbits and foxes as they ought to be. Ammi listened
without interest to this talk until one night when he drove past Nahum’s house in his
sleigh on the way back from Clark’s Corners. There had been a moon, and a rabbit had run
across the road, and the leaps of that rabbit were longer than either Ammi or his horse liked.
The latter, indeed, had almost run away when brought up by a firm rein. Thereafter Ammi gave
Nahum’s tales more respect, and wondered why the Gardner dogs seemed so cowed and quivering
every morning. They had, it developed, nearly lost the spirit to bark.
In February the McGregor boys from Meadow Hill were out shooting woodchucks,
and not far from the Gardner place bagged a very peculiar specimen. The proportions of its body
seemed slightly altered in a queer way impossible to describe, while its face had taken on an
expression which no one ever saw in a woodchuck before. The boys were genuinely frightened,
and threw the thing away at once, so that only their grotesque tales of it ever reached the
people of the countryside. But the shying of the horses near Nahum’s house had now
become an acknowledged thing, and all the basis for a cycle of whispered legend was fast taking
form.
People vowed that the snow melted faster around Nahum’s than it did anywhere
else, and early in March there was an awed discussion in Potter’s general store at Clark’s
Corners. Stephen Rice had driven past Gardner’s in the morning, and had noticed the skunk-cabbages
coming up through the mud by the woods across the road. Never were things of such size seen
before, and they held strange colours that could not be put into any words. Their shapes were
monstrous, and the horse had snorted at an odour which struck Stephen as wholly unprecedented.
That afternoon several persons drove past to see the abnormal growth, and all agreed that plants
of that kind ought never to sprout in a healthy world. The bad fruit of the fall before was
freely mentioned, and it went from mouth to mouth that there was poison in Nahum’s ground.
Of course it was the meteorite; and remembering how strange the men from the college had found
that stone to be, several farmers spoke about the matter to them.
One day they paid Nahum a visit; but having no love of wild tales and folklore
were very conservative in what they inferred. The plants were certainly odd, but all skunk-cabbages
are more or less odd in shape and odour and hue. Perhaps some mineral element from the stone
had entered the soil, but it would soon be washed away. And as for the footprints and frightened
horses—of course this was mere country talk which such a phenomenon as the aërolite
would be certain to start. There was really nothing for serious men to do in cases of wild gossip,
for superstitious rustics will say and believe anything. And so all through the strange days
the professors stayed away in contempt. Only one of them, when given two phials of dust for
analysis in a police job over a year and a half later, recalled that the queer colour of that
skunk-cabbage had been very like one of the anomalous bands of light shewn by the meteor fragment
in the college spectroscope, and like the brittle globule found imbedded in the stone from the
abyss. The samples in this analysis case gave the same odd bands at first, though later they
lost the property.
The trees budded prematurely around Nahum’s, and at night they swayed
ominously in the wind. Nahum’s second son Thaddeus, a lad of fifteen, swore that they
swayed also when there was no wind; but even the gossips would not credit this. Certainly, however,
restlessness was in the air. The entire Gardner family developed the habit of stealthy listening,
though not for any sound which they could consciously name. The listening was, indeed, rather
a product of moments when consciousness seemed half to slip away. Unfortunately such moments
increased week by week, till it became common speech that “something was wrong with all
Nahum’s folks”. When the early saxifrage came out it had another strange colour;
not quite like that of the skunk-cabbage, but plainly related and equally unknown to anyone
who saw it. Nahum took some blossoms to Arkham and shewed them to the editor of the Gazette,
but that dignitary did no more than write a humorous article about them, in which the dark fears
of rustics were held up to polite ridicule. It was a mistake of Nahum’s to tell a stolid
city man about the way the great, overgrown mourning-cloak butterflies behaved in connexion
with these saxifrages.
April brought a kind of madness to the country folk, and began that disuse
of the road past Nahum’s which led to its ultimate abandonment. It was the vegetation.
All the orchard trees blossomed forth in strange colours, and through the stony soil of the
yard and adjacent pasturage there sprang up a bizarre growth which only a botanist could connect
with the proper flora of the region. No sane wholesome colours were anywhere to be seen except
in the green grass and leafage; but everywhere those hectic and prismatic variants of some diseased,
underlying primary tone without a place among the known tints of earth. The Dutchman’s
breeches became a thing of sinister menace, and the bloodroots grew insolent in their chromatic
perversion. Ammi and the Gardners thought that most of the colours had a sort of haunting familiarity,
and decided that they reminded one of the brittle globule in the meteor. Nahum ploughed and
sowed the ten-acre pasture and the upland lot, but did nothing with the land around the house.
He knew it would be of no use, and hoped that the summer’s strange growths would draw
all the poison from the soil. He was prepared for almost anything now, and had grown used to
the sense of something near him waiting to be heard. The shunning of his house by neighbours
told on him, of course; but it told on his wife more. The boys were better off, being at school
each day; but they could not help being frightened by the gossip. Thaddeus, an especially sensitive
youth, suffered the most.
In May the insects came, and Nahum’s place became a nightmare of buzzing
and crawling. Most of the creatures seemed not quite usual in their aspects and motions, and
their nocturnal habits contradicted all former experience. The Gardners took to watching at
night—watching in all directions at random for something . . . they could
not tell what. It was then that they all owned that Thaddeus had been right about the trees.
Mrs. Gardner was the next to see it from the window as she watched the swollen boughs of a maple
against a moonlit sky. The boughs surely moved, and there was no wind. It must be the sap. Strangeness
had come into everything growing now. Yet it was none of Nahum’s family at all who made
the next discovery. Familiarity had dulled them, and what they could not see was glimpsed by
a timid windmill salesman from Bolton who drove by one night in ignorance of the country legends.
What he told in Arkham was given a short paragraph in the Gazette; and it was there that
all the farmers, Nahum included, saw it first. The night had been dark and the buggy-lamps faint,
but around a farm in the valley which everyone knew from the account must be Nahum’s the
darkness had been less thick. A dim though distinct luminosity seemed to inhere in all the vegetation,
grass, leaves, and blossoms alike, while at one moment a detached piece of the phosphorescence
appeared to stir furtively in the yard near the barn.
The grass had so far seemed untouched, and the cows were freely pastured in
the lot near the house, but toward the end of May the milk began to be bad. Then Nahum had the
cows driven to the uplands, after which the trouble ceased. Not long after this the change in
grass and leaves became apparent to the eye. All the verdure was going grey, and was developing
a highly singular quality of brittleness. Ammi was now the only person who ever visited the
place, and his visits were becoming fewer and fewer. When school closed the Gardners were virtually
cut off from the world, and sometimes let Ammi do their errands in town. They were failing curiously
both physically and mentally, and no one was surprised when the news of Mrs. Gardner’s
madness stole around.
It happened in June, about the anniversary of the meteor’s fall, and
the poor woman screamed about things in the air which she could not describe. In her raving
there was not a single specific noun, but only verbs and pronouns. Things moved and changed
and fluttered, and ears tingled to impulses which were not wholly sounds. Something was taken
away—she was being drained of something—something was fastening itself on her that
ought not to be—someone must make it keep off—nothing was ever still in the night—the
walls and windows shifted. Nahum did not send her to the county asylum, but let her wander about
the house as long as she was harmless to herself and others. Even when her expression changed
he did nothing. But when the boys grew afraid of her, and Thaddeus nearly fainted at the way
she made faces at him, he decided to keep her locked in the attic. By July she had ceased to
speak and crawled on all fours, and before that month was over Nahum got the mad notion that
she was slightly luminous in the dark, as he now clearly saw was the case with the nearby vegetation.
It was a little before this that the horses had stampeded. Something had aroused
them in the night, and their neighing and kicking in their stalls had been terrible. There seemed
virtually nothing to do to calm them, and when Nahum opened the stable door they all bolted
out like frightened woodland deer. It took a week to track all four, and when found they were
seen to be quite useless and unmanageable. Something had snapped in their brains, and each one
had to be shot for its own good. Nahum borrowed a horse from Ammi for his haying, but found
it would not approach the barn. It shied, balked, and whinnied, and in the end he could do nothing
but drive it into the yard while the men used their own strength to get the heavy wagon near
enough the hayloft for convenient pitching. And all the while the vegetation was turning grey
and brittle. Even the flowers whose hues had been so strange were greying now, and the fruit
was coming out grey and dwarfed and tasteless. The asters and goldenrod bloomed grey and distorted,
and the roses and zinneas and hollyhocks in the front yard were such blasphemous-looking things
that Nahum’s oldest boy Zenas cut them down. The strangely puffed insects died about that
time, even the bees that had left their hives and taken to the woods.
By September all the vegetation was fast crumbling to a greyish powder, and
Nahum feared that the trees would die before the poison was out of the soil. His wife now had
spells of terrific screaming, and he and the boys were in a constant state of nervous tension.
They shunned people now, and when school opened the boys did not go. But it was Ammi, on one
of his rare visits, who first realised that the well water was no longer good. It had an evil
taste that was not exactly foetid nor exactly salty, and Ammi advised his friend to dig another
well on higher ground to use till the soil was good again. Nahum, however, ignored the warning,
for he had by that time become calloused to strange and unpleasant things. He and the boys continued
to use the tainted supply, drinking it as listlessly and mechanically as they ate their meagre
and ill-cooked meals and did their thankless and monotonous chores through the aimless days.
There was something of stolid resignation about them all, as if they walked half in another
world between lines of nameless guards to a certain and familiar doom.
Thaddeus went mad in September after a visit to the well. He had gone with
a pail and had come back empty-handed, shrieking and waving his arms, and sometimes lapsing
into an inane titter or a whisper about “the moving colours down there”. Two in
one family was pretty bad, but Nahum was very brave about it. He let the boy run about for a
week until he began stumbling and hurting himself, and then he shut him in an attic room across
the hall from his mother’s. The way they screamed at each other from behind their locked
doors was very terrible, especially to little Merwin, who fancied they talked in some terrible
language that was not of earth. Merwin was getting frightfully imaginative, and his restlessness
was worse after the shutting away of the brother who had been his greatest playmate.
Almost at the same time the mortality among the livestock commenced. Poultry
turned greyish and died very quickly, their meat being found dry and noisome upon cutting. Hogs
grew inordinately fat, then suddenly began to undergo loathsome changes which no one could explain.
Their meat was of course useless, and Nahum was at his wit’s end. No rural veterinary
would approach his place, and the city veterinary from Arkham was openly baffled. The swine
began growing grey and brittle and falling to pieces before they died, and their eyes and muzzles
developed singular alterations. It was very inexplicable, for they had never been fed from the
tainted vegetation. Then something struck the cows. Certain areas or sometimes the whole body
would be uncannily shrivelled or compressed, and atrocious collapses or disintegrations were
common. In the last stages—and death was always the result—there would be a greying
and turning brittle like that which beset the hogs. There could be no question of poison, for
all the cases occurred in a locked and undisturbed barn. No bites of prowling things could have
brought the virus, for what live beast of earth can pass through solid obstacles? It must be
only natural disease—yet what disease could wreak such results was beyond any mind’s
guessing. When the harvest came there was not an animal surviving on the place, for the stock
and poultry were dead and the dogs had run away. These dogs, three in number, had all vanished
one night and were never heard of again. The five cats had left some time before, but their
going was scarcely noticed since there now seemed to be no mice, and only Mrs. Gardner had made
pets of the graceful felines.
On the nineteenth of October Nahum staggered into Ammi’s house with hideous
news. The death had come to poor Thaddeus in his attic room, and it had come in a way which
could not be told. Nahum had dug a grave in the railed family plot behind the farm, and had
put therein what he found. There could have been nothing from outside, for the small barred
window and locked door were intact; but it was much as it had been in the barn. Ammi and his
wife consoled the stricken man as best they could, but shuddered as they did so. Stark terror
seemed to cling round the Gardners and all they touched, and the very presence of one in the
house was a breath from regions unnamed and unnamable. Ammi accompanied Nahum home with the
greatest reluctance, and did what he might to calm the hysterical sobbing of little Merwin.
Zenas needed no calming. He had come of late to do nothing but stare into space and obey what
his father told him; and Ammi thought that his fate was very merciful. Now and then Merwin’s
screams were answered faintly from the attic, and in response to an inquiring look Nahum said
that his wife was getting very feeble. When night approached, Ammi managed to get away; for
not even friendship could make him stay in that spot when the faint glow of the vegetation began
and the trees may or may not have swayed without wind. It was really lucky for Ammi that he
was not more imaginative. Even as things were, his mind was bent ever so slightly; but had he
been able to connect and reflect upon all the portents around him he must inevitably have turned
a total maniac. In the twilight he hastened home, the screams of the mad woman and the nervous
child ringing horribly in his ears.
Three days later Nahum lurched into Ammi’s kitchen in the early morning,
and in the absence of his host stammered out a desperate tale once more, while Mrs. Pierce listened
in a clutching fright. It was little Merwin this time. He was gone. He had gone out late at
night with a lantern and pail for water, and had never come back. He’d been going to pieces
for days, and hardly knew what he was about. Screamed at everything. There had been a frantic
shriek from the yard then, but before the father could get to the door, the boy was gone. There
was no glow from the lantern he had taken, and of the child himself no trace. At the time Nahum
thought the lantern and pail were gone too; but when dawn came, and the man had plodded back
from his all-night search of the woods and fields, he had found some very curious things near
the well. There was a crushed and apparently somewhat melted mass of iron which had certainly
been the lantern; while a bent bail and twisted iron hoops beside it, both half-fused, seemed
to hint at the remnants of the pail. That was all. Nahum was past imagining, Mrs. Pierce was
blank, and Ammi, when he had reached home and heard the tale, could give no guess. Merwin was
gone, and there would be no use in telling the people around, who shunned all Gardners now.
No use, either, in telling the city people at Arkham who laughed at everything. Thad was gone,
and now Merwin was gone. Something was creeping and creeping and waiting to be seen and felt
and heard. Nahum would go soon, and he wanted Ammi to look after his wife and Zenas if they
survived him. It must all be a judgment of some sort; though he could not fancy what for, since
he had always walked uprightly in the Lord’s ways so far as he knew.
For over two weeks Ammi saw nothing of Nahum; and then, worried about what
might have happened, he overcame his fears and paid the Gardner place a visit. There was no
smoke from the great chimney, and for a moment the visitor was apprehensive of the worst. The
aspect of the whole farm was shocking—greyish withered grass and leaves on the ground,
vines falling in brittle wreckage from archaic walls and gables, and great bare trees clawing
up at the grey November sky with a studied malevolence which Ammi could not but feel had come
from some subtle change in the tilt of the branches. But Nahum was alive, after all. He was
weak, and lying on a couch in the low-ceiled kitchen, but perfectly conscious and able to give
simple orders to Zenas. The room was deadly cold; and as Ammi visibly shivered, the host shouted
huskily to Zenas for more wood. Wood, indeed, was sorely needed; since the cavernous fireplace
was unlit and empty, with a cloud of soot blowing about in the chill wind that came down the
chimney. Presently Nahum asked him if the extra wood had made him any more comfortable, and
then Ammi saw what had happened. The stoutest cord had broken at last, and the hapless farmer’s
mind was proof against more sorrow.
Questioning tactfully, Ammi could get no clear data at all about the missing
Zenas. “In the well—he lives in the well—” was all that the clouded
father would say. Then there flashed across the visitor’s mind a sudden thought of the
mad wife, and he changed his line of inquiry. “Nabby? Why, here she is!” was the
surprised response of poor Nahum, and Ammi soon saw that he must search for himself. Leaving
the harmless babbler on the couch, he took the keys from their nail beside the door and climbed
the creaking stairs to the attic. It was very close and noisome up there, and no sound could
be heard from any direction. Of the four doors in sight, only one was locked, and on this he
tried various keys on the ring he had taken. The third key proved the right one, and after some
fumbling Ammi threw open the low white door.
It was quite dark inside, for the window was small and half-obscured by the
crude wooden bars; and Ammi could see nothing at all on the wide-planked floor. The stench was
beyond enduring, and before proceeding further he had to retreat to another room and return
with his lungs filled with breathable air. When he did enter he saw something dark in the corner,
and upon seeing it more clearly he screamed outright. While he screamed he thought a momentary
cloud eclipsed the window, and a second later he felt himself brushed as if by some hateful
current of vapour. Strange colours danced before his eyes; and had not a present horror numbed
him he would have thought of the globule in the meteor that the geologist’s hammer had
shattered, and of the morbid vegetation that had sprouted in the spring. As it was he thought
only of the blasphemous monstrosity which confronted him, and which all too clearly had shared
the nameless fate of young Thaddeus and the livestock. But the terrible thing about this horror
was that it very slowly and perceptibly moved as it continued to crumble.
Ammi would give me no added particulars to this scene, but the shape in the
corner does not reappear in his tale as a moving object. There are things which cannot be mentioned,
and what is done in common humanity is sometimes cruelly judged by the law. I gathered that
no moving thing was left in that attic room, and that to leave anything capable of motion there
would have been a deed so monstrous as to damn any accountable being to eternal torment. Anyone
but a stolid farmer would have fainted or gone mad, but Ammi walked conscious through that low
doorway and locked the accursed secret behind him. There would be Nahum to deal with now; he
must be fed and tended, and removed to some place where he could be cared for.
Commencing his descent of the dark stairs, Ammi heard a thud below him. He
even thought a scream had been suddenly choked off, and recalled nervously the clammy vapour
which had brushed by him in that frightful room above. What presence had his cry and entry started
up? Halted by some vague fear, he heard still further sounds below. Indubitably there was a
sort of heavy dragging, and a most detestably sticky noise as of some fiendish and unclean species
of suction. With an associative sense goaded to feverish heights, he thought unaccountably of
what he had seen upstairs. Good God! What eldritch dream-world was this into which he had blundered?
He dared move neither backward nor forward, but stood there trembling at the black curve of
the boxed-in staircase. Every trifle of the scene burned itself into his brain. The sounds,
the sense of dread expectancy, the darkness, the steepness of the narrow steps—and merciful
heaven! . . . the faint but unmistakable luminosity of all the woodwork in sight;
steps, sides, exposed laths, and beams alike!
Then there burst forth a frantic whinny from Ammi’s horse outside, followed
at once by a clatter which told of a frenzied runaway. In another moment horse and buggy had
gone beyond earshot, leaving the frightened man on the dark stairs to guess what had sent them.
But that was not all. There had been another sound out there. A sort of liquid splash—water—it
must have been the well. He had left Hero untied near it, and a buggy-wheel must have brushed
the coping and knocked in a stone. And still the pale phosphorescence glowed in that detestably
ancient woodwork. God! how old the house was! Most of it built before 1670, and the gambrel
roof not later than 1730.
A feeble scratching on the floor downstairs now sounded distinctly, and Ammi’s
grip tightened on a heavy stick he had picked up in the attic for some purpose. Slowly nerving
himself, he finished his descent and walked boldly toward the kitchen. But he did not complete
the walk, because what he sought was no longer there. It had come to meet him, and it was still
alive after a fashion. Whether it had crawled or whether it had been dragged by any external
force, Ammi could not say; but the death had been at it. Everything had happened in the last
half-hour, but collapse, greying, and disintegration were already far advanced. There was a
horrible brittleness, and dry fragments were scaling off. Ammi could not touch it, but looked
horrifiedly into the distorted parody that had been a face. “What was it, Nahum—what
was it?” he whispered, and the cleft, bulging lips were just able to crackle out a final
answer.
“Nothin’ . . . nothin’ . . . the
colour . . . it burns . . . cold an’ wet . . .
but it burns . . . it lived in the well . . . I seen it . . .
a kind o’ smoke . . . jest like the flowers last spring . . .
the well shone at night . . . Thad an’ Mernie an’ Zenas . . .
everything alive . . . suckin’ the life out of everything . . .
in that stone . . . it must a’ come in that stone . . .
pizened the whole place . . . dun’t know what it wants . . .
that round thing them men from the college dug outen the stone . . . they smashed
it . . . it was that same colour . . . jest the same, like the
flowers an’ plants . . . must a’ ben more of ’em . . .
seeds . . . seeds . . . they growed . . . I seen
it the fust time this week . . . must a’ got strong on Zenas . . .
he was a big boy, full o’ life . . . it beats down your mind an’
then gits ye . . . burns ye up . . . in the well water . . .
you was right about that . . . evil water . . . Zenas never come
back from the well . . . can’t git away . . . draws ye . . .
ye know summ’at’s comin’, but ’tain’t no use . . . I
seen it time an’ agin senct Zenas was took . . . whar’s Nabby,
Ammi? . . . my head’s no good . . . dun’t know how long senct
I fed her . . . it’ll git her ef we ain’t keerful . . .
jest a colour . . . her face is gettin’ to hev that colour sometimes towards
night . . . an’ it burns an’ sucks . . . it come from
some place whar things ain’t as they is here . . . one o’ them professors
said so . . . he was right . . . look out, Ammi, it’ll do
suthin’ more . . . sucks the life out. . . .”
But that was all. That which spoke could speak no more because it had completely
caved in. Ammi laid a red checked tablecloth over what was left and reeled out the back door
into the fields. He climbed the slope to the ten-acre pasture and stumbled home by the north
road and the woods. He could not pass that well from which his horse had run away. He had looked
at it through the window, and had seen that no stone was missing from the rim. Then the lurching
buggy had not dislodged anything after all—the splash had been something else—something
which went into the well after it had done with poor Nahum. . . . 
When Ammi reached his house the horse and buggy had arrived before him and
thrown his wife into fits of anxiety. Reassuring her without explanations, he set out at once
for Arkham and notified the authorities that the Gardner family was no more. He indulged in
no details, but merely told of the deaths of Nahum and Nabby, that of Thaddeus being already
known, and mentioned that the cause seemed to be the same strange ailment which had killed the
livestock. He also stated that Merwin and Zenas had disappeared. There was considerable questioning
at the police station, and in the end Ammi was compelled to take three officers to the Gardner
farm, together with the coroner, the medical examiner, and the veterinary who had treated the
diseased animals. He went much against his will, for the afternoon was advancing and he feared
the fall of night over that accursed place, but it was some comfort to have so many people with
him.
The six men drove out in a democrat-wagon, following Ammi’s buggy, and
arrived at the pest-ridden farmhouse about four o’clock. Used as the officers were to
gruesome experiences, not one remained unmoved at what was found in the attic and under the
red checked tablecloth on the floor below. The whole aspect of the farm with its grey desolation
was terrible enough, but those two crumbling objects were beyond all bounds. No one could look
long at them, and even the medical examiner admitted that there was very little to examine.
Specimens could be analysed, of course, so he busied himself in obtaining them—and here
it develops that a very puzzling aftermath occurred at the college laboratory where the two
phials of dust were finally taken. Under the spectroscope both samples gave off an unknown spectrum,
in which many of the baffling bands were precisely like those which the strange meteor had yielded
in the previous year. The property of emitting this spectrum vanished in a month, the dust thereafter
consisting mainly of alkaline phosphates and carbonates.
Ammi would not have told the men about the well if he had thought they meant
to do anything then and there. It was getting toward sunset, and he was anxious to be away.
But he could not help glancing nervously at the stony curb by the great sweep, and when a detective
questioned him he admitted that Nahum had feared something down there—so much so that
he had never even thought of searching it for Merwin or Zenas. After that nothing would do but
that they empty and explore the well immediately, so Ammi had to wait trembling while pail after
pail of rank water was hauled up and splashed on the soaking ground outside. The men sniffed
in disgust at the fluid, and toward the last held their noses against the foetor they were uncovering.
It was not so long a job as they had feared it would be, since the water was phenomenally low.
There is no need to speak too exactly of what they found. Merwin and Zenas were both there,
in part, though the vestiges were mainly skeletal. There were also a small deer and a large
dog in about the same state, and a number of bones of smaller animals. The ooze and slime at
the bottom seemed inexplicably porous and bubbling, and a man who descended on hand-holds with
a long pole found that he could sink the wooden shaft to any depth in the mud of the floor without
meeting any solid obstruction.
Twilight had now fallen, and lanterns were brought from the house. Then, when
it was seen that nothing further could be gained from the well, everyone went indoors and conferred
in the ancient sitting-room while the intermittent light of a spectral half-moon played wanly
on the grey desolation outside. The men were frankly nonplussed by the entire case, and could
find no convincing common element to link the strange vegetable conditions, the unknown disease
of livestock and humans, and the unaccountable deaths of Merwin and Zenas in the tainted well.
They had heard the common country talk, it is true; but could not believe that anything contrary
to natural law had occurred. No doubt the meteor had poisoned the soil, but the illness of persons
and animals who had eaten nothing grown in that soil was another matter. Was it the well water?
Very possibly. It might be a good idea to analyse it. But what peculiar madness could have made
both boys jump into the well? Their deeds were so similar—and the fragments shewed that
they had both suffered from the grey brittle death. Why was everything so grey and brittle?
It was the coroner, seated near a window overlooking the yard, who first noticed
the glow about the well. Night had fully set in, and all the abhorrent grounds seemed faintly
luminous with more than the fitful moonbeams; but this new glow was something definite and distinct,
and appeared to shoot up from the black pit like a softened ray from a searchlight, giving dull
reflections in the little ground pools where the water had been emptied. It had a very queer
colour, and as all the men clustered round the window Ammi gave a violent start. For this strange
beam of ghastly miasma was to him of no unfamiliar hue. He had seen that colour before, and
feared to think what it might mean. He had seen it in the nasty brittle globule in that aërolite
two summers ago, had seen it in the crazy vegetation of the springtime, and had thought he had
seen it for an instant that very morning against the small barred window of that terrible attic
room where nameless things had happened. It had flashed there a second, and a clammy and hateful
current of vapour had brushed past him—and then poor Nahum had been taken by something
of that colour. He had said so at the last—said it was the globule and the plants. After
that had come the runaway in the yard and the splash in the well—and now that well was
belching forth to the night a pale insidious beam of the same daemoniac tint.
It does credit to the alertness of Ammi’s mind that he puzzled even at
that tense moment over a point which was essentially scientific. He could not but wonder at
his gleaning of the same impression from a vapour glimpsed in the daytime, against a window
opening on the morning sky, and from a nocturnal exhalation seen as a phosphorescent mist against
the black and blasted landscape. It wasn’t right—it was against Nature—and
he thought of those terrible last words of his stricken friend, “It come from some place
whar things ain’t as they is here . . . one o’ them professors said
so. . . .”
All three horses outside, tied to a pair of shrivelled saplings by the road,
were now neighing and pawing frantically. The wagon driver started for the door to do something,
but Ammi laid a shaky hand on his shoulder. “Dun’t go out thar,” he whispered.
“They’s more to this nor what we know. Nahum said somethin’ lived in the well
that sucks your life out. He said it must be some’at growed from a round ball like one
we all seen in the meteor stone that fell a year ago June. Sucks an’ burns, he said, an’
is jest a cloud of colour like that light out thar now, that ye can hardly see an’ can’t
tell what it is. Nahum thought it feeds on everything livin’ an’ gits stronger all
the time. He said he seen it this last week. It must be somethin’ from away off in the
sky like the men from the college last year says the meteor stone was. The way it’s made
an’ the way it works ain’t like no way o’ God’s world. It’s some’at
from beyond.”
So the men paused indecisively as the light from the well grew stronger and
the hitched horses pawed and whinnied in increasing frenzy. It was truly an awful moment; with
terror in that ancient and accursed house itself, four monstrous sets of fragments—two
from the house and two from the well—in the woodshed behind, and that shaft of unknown
and unholy iridescence from the slimy depths in front. Ammi had restrained the driver on impulse,
forgetting how uninjured he himself was after the clammy brushing of that coloured vapour in
the attic room, but perhaps it is just as well that he acted as he did. No one will ever know
what was abroad that night; and though the blasphemy from beyond had not so far hurt any human
of unweakened mind, there is no telling what it might not have done at that last moment, and
with its seemingly increased strength and the special signs of purpose it was soon to display
beneath the half-clouded moonlit sky.
All at once one of the detectives at the window gave a short, sharp gasp. The
others looked at him, and then quickly followed his own gaze upward to the point at which its
idle straying had been suddenly arrested. There was no need for words. What had been disputed
in country gossip was disputable no longer, and it is because of the thing which every man of
that party agreed in whispering later on that the strange days are never talked about in Arkham.
It is necessary to premise that there was no wind at that hour of the evening. One did arise
not long afterward, but there was absolutely none then. Even the dry tips of the lingering hedge-mustard,
grey and blighted, and the fringe on the roof of the standing democrat-wagon were unstirred.
And yet amid that tense, godless calm the high bare boughs of all the trees in the yard were
moving. They were twitching morbidly and spasmodically, clawing in convulsive and epileptic
madness at the moonlit clouds; scratching impotently in the noxious air as if jerked by some
alien and bodiless line of linkage with subterrene horrors writhing and struggling below the
black roots.
Not a man breathed for several seconds. Then a cloud of darker depth passed
over the moon, and the silhouette of clutching branches faded out momentarily. At this there
was a general cry; muffled with awe, but husky and almost identical from every throat. For the
terror had not faded with the silhouette, and in a fearsome instant of deeper darkness the watchers
saw wriggling at that treetop height a thousand tiny points of faint and unhallowed radiance,
tipping each bough like the fire of St. Elmo or the flames that came down on the apostles’
heads at Pentecost. It was a monstrous constellation of unnatural light, like a glutted swarm
of corpse-fed fireflies dancing hellish sarabands over an accursed marsh; and its colour was
that same nameless intrusion which Ammi had come to recognise and dread. All the while the shaft
of phosphorescence from the well was getting brighter and brighter, bringing to the minds of
the huddled men a sense of doom and abnormality which far outraced any image their conscious
minds could form. It was no longer shining out, it was pouring out; and as the
shapeless stream of unplaceable colour left the well it seemed to flow directly into the sky.
The veterinary shivered, and walked to the front door to drop the heavy extra
bar across it. Ammi shook no less, and had to tug and point for lack of a controllable voice
when he wished to draw notice to the growing luminosity of the trees. The neighing and stamping
of the horses had become utterly frightful, but not a soul of that group in the old house would
have ventured forth for any earthly reward. With the moments the shining of the trees increased,
while their restless branches seemed to strain more and more toward verticality. The wood of
the well-sweep was shining now, and presently a policeman dumbly pointed to some wooden sheds
and bee-hives near the stone wall on the west. They were commencing to shine, too, though the
tethered vehicles of the visitors seemed so far unaffected. Then there was a wild commotion
and clopping in the road, and as Ammi quenched the lamp for better seeing they realised that
the span of frantic greys had broke their sapling and run off with the democrat-wagon.
The shock served to loosen several tongues, and embarrassed whispers were exchanged.
“It spreads on everything organic that’s been around here,” muttered the medical
examiner. No one replied, but the man who had been in the well gave a hint that his long pole
must have stirred up something intangible. “It was awful,” he added. “There
was no bottom at all. Just ooze and bubbles and the feeling of something lurking under there.”
Ammi’s horse still pawed and screamed deafeningly in the road outside, and nearly drowned
its owner’s faint quaver as he mumbled his formless reflections. “It come from that
stone . . . it growed down thar . . . it got everything
livin’ . . . it fed itself on ’em, mind and body . . . Thad an’
Mernie, Zenas an’ Nabby . . . Nahum was the last . . . they all
drunk the water . . . it got strong on ’em . . . it come
from beyond, whar things ain’t like they be here . . . now it’s goin’
home. . . .”
At this point, as the column of unknown colour flared suddenly stronger and
began to weave itself into fantastic suggestions of shape which each spectator later described
differently, there came from poor tethered Hero such a sound as no man before or since ever
heard from a horse. Every person in that low-pitched sitting room stopped his ears, and Ammi
turned away from the window in horror and nausea. Words could not convey it—when Ammi
looked out again the hapless beast lay huddled inert on the moonlit ground between the splintered
shafts of the buggy. That was the last of Hero till they buried him next day. But the present
was no time to mourn, for almost at this instant a detective silently called attention to something
terrible in the very room with them. In the absence of the lamplight it was clear that a faint
phosphorescence had begun to pervade the entire apartment. It glowed on the broad-planked floor
and the fragment of rag carpet, and shimmered over the sashes of the small-paned windows. It
ran up and down the exposed corner-posts, coruscated about the shelf and mantel, and infected
the very doors and furniture. Each minute saw it strengthen, and at last it was very plain that
healthy living things must leave that house.
Ammi shewed them the back door and the path up through the fields to the ten-acre
pasture. They walked and stumbled as in a dream, and did not dare look back till they were far
away on the high ground. They were glad of the path, for they could not have gone the front
way, by that well. It was bad enough passing the glowing barn and sheds, and those shining orchard
trees with their gnarled, fiendish contours; but thank heaven the branches did their worst twisting
high up. The moon went under some very black clouds as they crossed the rustic bridge over Chapman’s
Brook, and it was blind groping from there to the open meadows.
When they looked back toward the valley and the distant Gardner place at the
bottom they saw a fearsome sight. All the farm was shining with the hideous unknown blend of
colour; trees, buildings, and even such grass and herbage as had not been wholly changed to
lethal grey brittleness. The boughs were all straining skyward, tipped with tongues of foul
flame, and lambent tricklings of the same monstrous fire were creeping about the ridgepoles
of the house, barn, and sheds. It was a scene from a vision of Fuseli, and over all the rest
reigned that riot of luminous amorphousness, that alien and undimensioned rainbow of cryptic
poison from the well—seething, feeling, lapping, reaching, scintillating, straining, and
malignly bubbling in its cosmic and unrecognisable chromaticism.
Then without warning the hideous thing shot vertically up toward the sky like
a rocket or meteor, leaving behind no trail and disappearing through a round and curiously regular
hole in the clouds before any man could gasp or cry out. No watcher can ever forget that sight,
and Ammi stared blankly at the stars of Cygnus, Deneb twinkling above the others, where the
unknown colour had melted into the Milky Way. But his gaze was the next moment called swiftly
to earth by the crackling in the valley. It was just that. Only a wooden ripping and crackling,
and not an explosion, as so many others of the party vowed. Yet the outcome was the same, for
in one feverish, kaleidoscopic instant there burst up from that doomed and accursed farm a gleamingly
eruptive cataclysm of unnatural sparks and substance; blurring the glance of the few who saw
it, and sending forth to the zenith a bombarding cloudburst of such coloured and fantastic fragments
as our universe must needs disown. Through quickly re-closing vapours they followed the great
morbidity that had vanished, and in another second they had vanished too. Behind and below was
only a darkness to which the men dared not return, and all about was a mounting wind which seemed
to sweep down in black, frore gusts from interstellar space. It shrieked and howled, and lashed
the fields and distorted woods in a mad cosmic frenzy, till soon the trembling party realised
it would be no use waiting for the moon to shew what was left down there at Nahum’s.
Too awed even to hint theories, the seven shaking men trudged back toward Arkham
by the north road. Ammi was worse than his fellows, and begged them to see him inside his own
kitchen, instead of keeping straight on to town. He did not wish to cross the nighted, wind-whipped
woods alone to his home on the main road. For he had had an added shock that the others were
spared, and was crushed forever with a brooding fear he dared not even mention for many years
to come. As the rest of the watchers on that tempestuous hill had stolidly set their faces toward
the road, Ammi had looked back an instant at the shadowed valley of desolation so lately sheltering
his ill-starred friend. And from that stricken, far-away spot he had seen something feebly rise,
only to sink down again upon the place from which the great shapeless horror had shot into the
sky. It was just a colour—but not any colour of our earth or heavens. And because Ammi
recognised that colour, and knew that this last faint remnant must still lurk down there in
the well, he has never been quite right since.
Ammi would never go near the place again. It is over half a century now since
the horror happened, but he has never been there, and will be glad when the new reservoir blots
it out. I shall be glad, too, for I do not like the way the sunlight changed colour around the
mouth of that abandoned well I passed. I hope the water will always be very deep—but even
so, I shall never drink it. I do not think I shall visit the Arkham country hereafter. Three
of the men who had been with Ammi returned the next morning to see the ruins by daylight, but
there were not any real ruins. Only the bricks of the chimney, the stones of the cellar, some
mineral and metallic litter here and there, and the rim of that nefandous well. Save for Ammi’s
dead horse, which they towed away and buried, and the buggy which they shortly returned to him,
everything that had ever been living had gone. Five eldritch acres of dusty grey desert remained,
nor has anything ever grown there since. To this day it sprawls open to the sky like a great
spot eaten by acid in the woods and fields, and the few who have ever dared glimpse it in spite
of the rural tales have named it “the blasted heath”.
The rural tales are queer. They might be even queerer if city men and college
chemists could be interested enough to analyse the water from that disused well, or the grey
dust that no wind seems ever to disperse. Botanists, too, ought to study the stunted flora on
the borders of that spot, for they might shed light on the country notion that the blight is
spreading—little by little, perhaps an inch a year. People say the colour of the neighbouring
herbage is not quite right in the spring, and that wild things leave queer prints in the light
winter snow. Snow never seems quite so heavy on the blasted heath as it is elsewhere. Horses—the
few that are left in this motor age—grow skittish in the silent valley; and hunters cannot
depend on their dogs too near the splotch of greyish dust.
They say the mental influences are very bad, too. Numbers went queer in the
years after Nahum’s taking, and always they lacked the power to get away. Then the stronger-minded
folk all left the region, and only the foreigners tried to live in the crumbling old homesteads.
They could not stay, though; and one sometimes wonders what insight beyond ours their wild,
weird stores of whispered magic have given them. Their dreams at night, they protest, are very
horrible in that grotesque country; and surely the very look of the dark realm is enough to
stir a morbid fancy. No traveller has ever escaped a sense of strangeness in those deep ravines,
and artists shiver as they paint thick woods whose mystery is as much of the spirit as of the
eye. I myself am curious about the sensation I derived from my one lone walk before Ammi told
me his tale. When twilight came I had vaguely wished some clouds would gather, for an odd timidity
about the deep skyey voids above had crept into my soul.
Do not ask me for my opinion. I do not know—that is all. There was no
one but Ammi to question; for Arkham people will not talk about the strange days, and all three
professors who saw the aërolite and its coloured globule are dead. There were other globules—depend
upon that. One must have fed itself and escaped, and probably there was another which was too
late. No doubt it is still down the well—I know there was something wrong with the sunlight
I saw above that miasmal brink. The rustics say the blight creeps an inch a year, so perhaps
there is a kind of growth or nourishment even now. But whatever daemon hatchling is there, it
must be tethered to something or else it would quickly spread. Is it fastened to the roots of
those trees that claw the air? One of the current Arkham tales is about fat oaks that shine
and move as they ought not to do at night.
What it is, only God knows. In terms of matter I suppose the thing Ammi described
would be called a gas, but this gas obeyed laws that are not of our cosmos. This was no fruit
of such worlds and suns as shine on the telescopes and photographic plates of our observatories.
This was no breath from the skies whose motions and dimensions our astronomers measure or deem
too vast to measure. It was just a colour out of space—a frightful messenger from unformed
realms of infinity beyond all Nature as we know it; from realms whose mere existence stuns the
brain and numbs us with the black extra-cosmic gulfs it throws open before our frenzied eyes.
I doubt very much if Ammi consciously lied to me, and I do not think his tale
was all a freak of madness as the townfolk had forewarned. Something terrible came to the hills
and valleys on that meteor, and something terrible—though I know not in what proportion—still
remains. I shall be glad to see the water come. Meanwhile I hope nothing will happen to Ammi.
He saw so much of the thing—and its influence was so insidious. Why has he never been
able to move away? How clearly he recalled those dying words of Nahum’s—“can’t
git away . . . draws ye . . . ye know summ’at’s comin’,
but ’tain’t no use. . . .” Ammi is such a good old man—when
the reservoir gang gets to work I must write the chief engineer to keep a sharp watch on him.
I would hate to think of him as the grey, twisted, brittle monstrosity which persists more and
more in troubling my sleep.


The Festival

“Efficiunt
Daemones, ut quae non sunt, sic tamenquasi sint, conspicienda hominibus exhibeant.”—Lactantius.

I was far from home, and the spell of the eastern sea was upon me. In the twilight I heard it
pounding on the rocks, and I knew it lay just over the hill where the twisting willows writhed
against the clearing sky and the first stars of evening. And because my fathers had called me
to the old town beyond, I pushed on through the shallow, new-fallen snow along the road that
soared lonely up to where Aldebaran twinkled among the trees; on toward the very ancient town
I had never seen but often dreamed of.
It was the Yuletide, that men call Christmas though they know in their hearts
it is older than Bethlehem and Babylon, older than Memphis and mankind. It was the Yuletide,
and I had come at last to the ancient sea town where my people had dwelt and kept festival in
the elder time when festival was forbidden; where also they had commanded their sons to keep
festival once every century, that the memory of primal secrets might not be forgotten. Mine
were an old people, and were old even when this land was settled three hundred years before.
And they were strange, because they had come as dark furtive folk from opiate southern gardens
of orchids, and spoken another tongue before they learnt the tongue of the blue-eyed fishers.
And now they were scattered, and shared only the rituals of mysteries that none living could
understand. I was the only one who came back that night to the old fishing town as legend bade,
for only the poor and the lonely remember.
Then beyond the hill’s crest I saw Kingsport outspread frostily in the
gloaming; snowy Kingsport with its ancient vanes and steeples, ridgepoles and chimney-pots,
wharves and small bridges, willow-trees and graveyards; endless labyrinths of steep, narrow,
crooked streets, and dizzy church-crowned central peak that time durst not touch; ceaseless
mazes of colonial houses piled and scattered at all angles and levels like a child’s disordered
blocks; antiquity hovering on grey wings over winter-whitened gables and gambrel roofs; fanlights
and small-paned windows one by one gleaming out in the cold dusk to join Orion and the archaic
stars. And against the rotting wharves the sea pounded; the secretive, immemorial sea out of
which the people had come in the elder time.
Beside the road at its crest a still higher summit rose, bleak and windswept,
and I saw that it was a burying-ground where black gravestones stuck ghoulishly through the
snow like the decayed fingernails of a gigantic corpse. The printless road was very lonely,
and sometimes I thought I heard a distant horrible creaking as of a gibbet in the wind. They
had hanged four kinsmen of mine for witchcraft in 1692, but I did not know just where.
As the road wound down the seaward slope I listened for the merry sounds of
a village at evening, but did not hear them. Then I thought of the season, and felt that these
old Puritan folk might well have Christmas customs strange to me, and full of silent hearthside
prayer. So after that I did not listen for merriment or look for wayfarers, but kept on down
past the hushed lighted farmhouses and shadowy stone walls to where the signs of ancient shops
and sea-taverns creaked in the salt breeze, and the grotesque knockers of pillared doorways
glistened along deserted, unpaved lanes in the light of little, curtained windows.
I had seen maps of the town, and knew where to find the home of my people.
It was told that I should be known and welcomed, for village legend lives long; so I hastened
through Back Street to Circle Court, and across the fresh snow on the one full flagstone pavement
in the town, to where Green Lane leads off behind the Market house. The old maps still held
good, and I had no trouble; though at Arkham they must have lied when they said the trolleys
ran to this place, since I saw not a wire overhead. Snow would have hid the rails in any case.
I was glad I had chosen to walk, for the white village had seemed very beautiful from the hill;
and now I was eager to knock at the door of my people, the seventh house on the left in Green
Lane, with an ancient peaked roof and jutting second story, all built before 1650.
There were lights inside the house when I came upon it, and I saw from the
diamond window-panes that it must have been kept very close to its antique state. The upper
part overhung the narrow grass-grown street and nearly met the overhanging part of the house
opposite, so that I was almost in a tunnel, with the low stone doorstep wholly free from snow.
There was no sidewalk, but many houses had high doors reached by double flights of steps with
iron railings. It was an odd scene, and because I was strange to New England I had never known
its like before. Though it pleased me, I would have relished it better if there had been footprints
in the snow, and people in the streets, and a few windows without drawn curtains.
When I sounded the archaic iron knocker I was half afraid. Some fear had been
gathering in me, perhaps because of the strangeness of my heritage, and the bleakness of the
evening, and the queerness of the silence in that aged town of curious customs. And when my
knock was answered I was fully afraid, because I had not heard any footsteps before the door
creaked open. But I was not afraid long, for the gowned, slippered old man in the doorway had
a bland face that reassured me; and though he made signs that he was dumb, he wrote a quaint
and ancient welcome with the stylus and wax tablet he carried.
He beckoned me into a low, candle-lit room with massive exposed rafters and
dark, stiff, sparse furniture of the seventeenth century. The past was vivid there, for not
an attribute was missing. There was a cavernous fireplace and a spinning-wheel at which a bent
old woman in loose wrapper and deep poke-bonnet sat back toward me, silently spinning despite
the festive season. An indefinite dampness seemed upon the place, and I marvelled that no fire
should be blazing. The high-backed settle faced the row of curtained windows at the left, and
seemed to be occupied, though I was not sure. I did not like everything about what I saw, and
felt again the fear I had had. This fear grew stronger from what had before lessened it, for
the more I looked at the old man’s bland face the more its very blandness terrified me.
The eyes never moved, and the skin was too like wax. Finally I was sure it was not a face at
all, but a fiendishly cunning mask. But the flabby hands, curiously gloved, wrote genially on
the tablet and told me I must wait a while before I could be led to the place of festival.
Pointing to a chair, table, and pile of books, the old man now left the room;
and when I sat down to read I saw that the books were hoary and mouldy, and that they included
old Morryster’s wild Marvells of Science, the terrible Saducismus Triumphatus
of Joseph Glanvill, published in 1681, the shocking Daemonolatreia of Remigius, printed
in 1595 at Lyons, and worst of all, the unmentionable Necronomicon of the mad Arab Abdul
Alhazred, in Olaus Wormius’ forbidden Latin translation; a book which I had never seen,
but of which I had heard monstrous things whispered. No one spoke to me, but I could hear the
creaking of signs in the wind outside, and the whir of the wheel as the bonneted old woman continued
her silent spinning, spinning. I thought the room and the books and the people very morbid and
disquieting, but because an old tradition of my fathers had summoned me to strange feastings,
I resolved to expect queer things. So I tried to read, and soon became tremblingly absorbed
by something I found in that accursed Necronomicon; a thought and a legend too hideous
for sanity or consciousness. But I disliked it when I fancied I heard the closing of one of
the windows that the settle faced, as if it had been stealthily opened. It had seemed to follow
a whirring that was not of the old woman’s spinning-wheel. This was not much, though,
for the old woman was spinning very hard, and the aged clock had been striking. After that I
lost the feeling that there were persons on the settle, and was reading intently and shudderingly
when the old man came back booted and dressed in a loose antique costume, and sat down on that
very bench, so that I could not see him. It was certainly nervous waiting, and the blasphemous
book in my hands made it doubly so. When eleven struck, however, the old man stood up, glided
to a massive carved chest in a corner, and got two hooded cloaks; one of which he donned, and
the other of which he draped round the old woman, who was ceasing her monotonous spinning. Then
they both started for the outer door; the woman lamely creeping, and the old man, after picking
up the very book I had been reading, beckoning me as he drew his hood over that unmoving face
or mask.
We went out into the moonless and tortuous network of that incredibly ancient
town; went out as the lights in the curtained windows disappeared one by one, and the Dog Star
leered at the throng of cowled, cloaked figures that poured silently from every doorway and
formed monstrous processions up this street and that, past the creaking signs and antediluvian
gables, the thatched roofs and diamond-paned windows; threading precipitous lanes where decaying
houses overlapped and crumbled together, gliding across open courts and churchyards where the
bobbing lanthorns made eldritch drunken constellations.
Amid these hushed throngs I followed my voiceless guides; jostled by elbows
that seemed preternaturally soft, and pressed by chests and stomachs that seemed abnormally
pulpy; but seeing never a face and hearing never a word. Up, up, up the eerie columns slithered,
and I saw that all the travellers were converging as they flowed near a sort of focus of crazy
alleys at the top of a high hill in the centre of the town, where perched a great white church.
I had seen it from the road’s crest when I looked at Kingsport in the new dusk, and it
had made me shiver because Aldebaran had seemed to balance itself a moment on the ghostly spire.
There was an open space around the church; partly a churchyard with spectral
shafts, and partly a half-paved square swept nearly bare of snow by the wind, and lined with
unwholesomely archaic houses having peaked roofs and overhanging gables. Death-fires danced
over the tombs, revealing gruesome vistas, though queerly failing to cast any shadows. Past
the churchyard, where there were no houses, I could see over the hill’s summit and watch
the glimmer of stars on the harbour, though the town was invisible in the dark. Only once in
a while a lanthorn bobbed horribly through serpentine alleys on its way to overtake the throng
that was now slipping speechlessly into the church. I waited till the crowd had oozed into the
black doorway, and till all the stragglers had followed. The old man was pulling at my sleeve,
but I was determined to be the last. Then I finally went, the sinister man and the old spinning
woman before me. Crossing the threshold into that swarming temple of unknown darkness, I turned
once to look at the outside world as the churchyard phosphorescence cast a sickly glow on the
hill-top pavement. And as I did so I shuddered. For though the wind had not left much snow,
a few patches did remain on the path near the door; and in that fleeting backward look it seemed
to my troubled eyes that they bore no mark of passing feet, not even mine.
The church was scarce lighted by all the lanthorns that had entered it, for
most of the throng had already vanished. They had streamed up the aisle between the high white
pews to the trap-door of the vaults which yawned loathsomely open just before the pulpit, and
were now squirming noiselessly in. I followed dumbly down the footworn steps and into the dank,
suffocating crypt. The tail of that sinuous line of night-marchers seemed very horrible, and
as I saw them wriggling into a venerable tomb they seemed more horrible still. Then I noticed
that the tomb’s floor had an aperture down which the throng was sliding, and in a moment
we were all descending an ominous staircase of rough-hewn stone; a narrow spiral staircase damp
and peculiarly odorous, that wound endlessly down into the bowels of the hill past monotonous
walls of dripping stone blocks and crumbling mortar. It was a silent, shocking descent, and
I observed after a horrible interval that the walls and steps were changing in nature, as if
chiselled out of the solid rock. What mainly troubled me was that the myriad footfalls made
no sound and set up no echoes. After more aeons of descent I saw some side passages or burrows
leading from unknown recesses of blackness to this shaft of nighted mystery. Soon they became
excessively numerous, like impious catacombs of nameless menace; and their pungent odour of
decay grew quite unbearable. I knew we must have passed down through the mountain and beneath
the earth of Kingsport itself, and I shivered that a town should be so aged and maggoty with
subterraneous evil.
Then I saw the lurid shimmering of pale light, and heard the insidious lapping
of sunless waters. Again I shivered, for I did not like the things that the night had brought,
and wished bitterly that no forefather had summoned me to this primal rite. As the steps and
the passage grew broader, I heard another sound, the thin, whining mockery of a feeble flute;
and suddenly there spread out before me the boundless vista of an inner world—a vast fungous
shore litten by a belching column of sick greenish flame and washed by a wide oily river that
flowed from abysses frightful and unsuspected to join the blackest gulfs of immemorial ocean.
Fainting and gasping, I looked at that unhallowed Erebus of titan toadstools,
leprous fire, and slimy water, and saw the cloaked throngs forming a semicircle around the blazing
pillar. It was the Yule-rite, older than man and fated to survive him; the primal rite of the
solstice and of spring’s promise beyond the snows; the rite of fire and evergreen, light
and music. And in the Stygian grotto I saw them do the rite, and adore the sick pillar of flame,
and throw into the water handfuls gouged out of the viscous vegetation which glittered green
in the chlorotic glare. I saw this, and I saw something amorphously squatted far away from the
light, piping noisomely on a flute; and as the thing piped I thought I heard noxious muffled
flutterings in the foetid darkness where I could not see. But what frightened me most was that
flaming column; spouting volcanically from depths profound and inconceivable, casting no shadows
as healthy flame should, and coating the nitrous stone above with a nasty, venomous verdigris.
For in all that seething combustion no warmth lay, but only the clamminess of death and corruption.
The man who had brought me now squirmed to a point directly beside the hideous
flame, and made stiff ceremonial motions to the semicircle he faced. At certain stages of the
ritual they did grovelling obeisance, especially when he held above his head that abhorrent
Necronomicon he had taken with him; and I shared all the obeisances because I had been
summoned to this festival by the writings of my forefathers. Then the old man made a signal
to the half-seen flute-player in the darkness, which player thereupon changed its feeble drone
to a scarce louder drone in another key; precipitating as it did so a horror unthinkable and
unexpected. At this horror I sank nearly to the lichened earth, transfixed with a dread not
of this nor any world, but only of the mad spaces between the stars.
Out of the unimaginable blackness beyond the gangrenous glare of that cold
flame, out of the Tartarean leagues through which that oily river rolled uncanny, unheard, and
unsuspected, there flopped rhythmically a horde of tame, trained, hybrid winged things that
no sound eye could ever wholly grasp, or sound brain ever wholly remember. They were not altogether
crows, nor moles, nor buzzards, nor ants, nor vampire bats, nor decomposed human beings; but
something I cannot and must not recall. They flopped limply along, half with their webbed feet
and half with their membraneous wings; and as they reached the throng of celebrants the cowled
figures seized and mounted them, and rode off one by one along the reaches of that unlighted
river, into pits and galleries of panic where poison springs feed frightful and undiscoverable
cataracts.
The old spinning woman had gone with the throng, and the old man remained only
because I had refused when he motioned me to seize an animal and ride like the rest. I saw when
I staggered to my feet that the amorphous flute-player had rolled out of sight, but that two
of the beasts were patiently standing by. As I hung back, the old man produced his stylus and
tablet and wrote that he was the true deputy of my fathers who had founded the Yule worship
in this ancient place; that it had been decreed I should come back, and that the most secret
mysteries were yet to be performed. He wrote this in a very ancient hand, and when I still hesitated
he pulled from his loose robe a seal ring and a watch, both with my family arms, to prove that
he was what he said. But it was a hideous proof, because I knew from old papers that that watch
had been buried with my great-great-great-great-grandfather in 1698.
Presently the old man drew back his hood and pointed to the family resemblance
in his face, but I only shuddered, because I was sure that the face was merely a devilish waxen
mask. The flopping animals were now scratching restlessly at the lichens, and I saw that the
old man was nearly as restless himself. When one of the things began to waddle and edge away,
he turned quickly to stop it; so that the suddenness of his motion dislodged the waxen mask
from what should have been his head. And then, because that nightmare’s position barred
me from the stone staircase down which we had come, I flung myself into the oily underground
river that bubbled somewhere to the caves of the sea; flung myself into that putrescent juice
of earth’s inner horrors before the madness of my screams could bring down upon me all
the charnel legions these pest-gulfs might conceal.
At the hospital they told me I had been found half frozen in Kingsport Harbour
at dawn, clinging to the drifting spar that accident sent to save me. They told me I had taken
the wrong fork of the hill road the night before, and fallen over the cliffs at Orange Point;
a thing they deduced from prints found in the snow. There was nothing I could say, because everything
was wrong. Everything was wrong, with the broad window shewing a sea of roofs in which only
about one in five was ancient, and the sound of trolleys and motors in the streets below. They
insisted that this was Kingsport, and I could not deny it. When I went delirious at hearing
that the hospital stood near the old churchyard on Central Hill, they sent me to St. Mary’s
Hospital in Arkham, where I could have better care. I liked it there, for the doctors were broad-minded,
and even lent me their influence in obtaining the carefully sheltered copy of Alhazred’s
objectionable Necronomicon from the library of Miskatonic University. They said something
about a “psychosis”, and agreed I had better get any harassing obsessions off my
mind.
So I read again that hideous chapter, and shuddered doubly because it was indeed
not new to me. I had seen it before, let footprints tell what they might; and where it was I
had seen it were best forgotten. There was no one—in waking hours—who could remind
me of it; but my dreams are filled with terror, because of phrases I dare not quote. I dare
quote only one paragraph, put into such English as I can make from the awkward Low Latin.
“The nethermost caverns,” wrote the mad Arab, “are not for the fathoming of
eyes that see; for their marvels are strange and terrific. Cursed the ground where dead thoughts
live new and oddly bodied, and evil the mind that is held by no head. Wisely did Ibn Schacabao
say, that happy is the tomb where no wizard hath lain, and happy the town at night whose wizards
are all ashes. For it is of old rumour that the soul of the devil-bought hastes not from his
charnel clay, but fats and instructs the very worm that gnaws; till out of corruption
horrid life springs, and the dull scavengers of earth wax crafty to vex it and swell monstrous
to plague it. Great holes secretly are digged where earth’s pores ought to suffice, and
things have learnt to walk that ought to crawl.”


The Haunter of the Dark

(Dedicated to Robert Bloch)

I have seen the dark universe yawning
Where the black planets roll without aim—
Where they roll in their horror unheeded,
Without knowledge or lustre or name.
—Nemesis.

Cautious investigators will hesitate to challenge the common belief that Robert Blake was killed
by lightning, or by some profound nervous shock derived from an electrical discharge. It is
true that the window he faced was unbroken, but Nature has shewn herself capable of many freakish
performances. The expression on his face may easily have arisen from some obscure muscular source
unrelated to anything he saw, while the entries in his diary are clearly the result of a fantastic
imagination aroused by certain local superstitions and by certain old matters he had uncovered.
As for the anomalous conditions at the deserted church on Federal Hill—the shrewd analyst
is not slow in attributing them to some charlatanry, conscious or unconscious, with at least
some of which Blake was secretly connected.
For after all, the victim was a writer and painter wholly devoted to the field
of myth, dream, terror, and superstition, and avid in his quest for scenes and effects of a
bizarre, spectral sort. His earlier stay in the city—a visit to a strange old man as deeply
given to occult and forbidden lore as he—had ended amidst death and flame, and it must
have been some morbid instinct which drew him back from his home in Milwaukee. He may have known
of the old stories despite his statements to the contrary in the diary, and his death may have
nipped in the bud some stupendous hoax destined to have a literary reflection.
Among those, however, who have examined and correlated all this evidence, there
remain several who cling to less rational and commonplace theories. They are inclined to take
much of Blake’s diary at its face value, and point significantly to certain facts such
as the undoubted genuineness of the old church record, the verified existence of the disliked
and unorthodox Starry Wisdom sect prior to 1877, the recorded disappearance of an inquisitive
reporter named Edwin M. Lillibridge in 1893, and—above all—the look of monstrous,
transfiguring fear on the face of the young writer when he died. It was one of these believers
who, moved to fanatical extremes, threw into the bay the curiously angled stone and its strangely
adorned metal box found in the old church steeple—the black windowless steeple, and not
the tower where Blake’s diary said those things originally were. Though widely censured
both officially and unofficially, this man—a reputable physician with a taste for odd
folklore—averred that he had rid the earth of something too dangerous to rest upon it.
Between these two schools of opinion the reader must judge for himself. The
papers have given the tangible details from a sceptical angle, leaving for others the drawing
of the picture as Robert Blake saw it—or thought he saw it—or pretended to see it.
Now, studying the diary closely, dispassionately, and at leisure, let us summarise the dark
chain of events from the expressed point of view of their chief actor.
Young Blake returned to Providence in the winter of 1934–5, taking the
upper floor of a venerable dwelling in a grassy court off College Street—on the crest
of the great eastward hill near the Brown University campus and behind the marble John Hay Library.
It was a cosy and fascinating place, in a little garden oasis of village-like antiquity where
huge, friendly cats sunned themselves atop a convenient shed. The square Georgian house had
a monitor roof, classic doorway with fan carving, small-paned windows, and all the other earmarks
of early nineteenth-century workmanship. Inside were six-panelled doors, wide floor-boards,
a curving colonial staircase, white Adam-period mantels, and a rear set of rooms three steps
below the general level.
Blake’s study, a large southwest chamber, overlooked the front garden
on one side, while its west windows—before one of which he had his desk—faced off
from the brow of the hill and commanded a splendid view of the lower town’s outspread
roofs and of the mystical sunsets that flamed behind them. On the far horizon were the open
countryside’s purple slopes. Against these, some two miles away, rose the spectral hump
of Federal Hill, bristling with huddled roofs and steeples whose remote outlines wavered mysteriously,
taking fantastic forms as the smoke of the city swirled up and enmeshed them. Blake had a curious
sense that he was looking upon some unknown, ethereal world which might or might not vanish
in dream if ever he tried to seek it out and enter it in person.
Having sent home for most of his books, Blake bought some antique furniture
suitable to his quarters and settled down to write and paint—living alone, and attending
to the simple housework himself. His studio was in a north attic room, where the panes of the
monitor roof furnished admirable lighting. During that first winter he produced five of his
best-known short stories—“The Burrower Beneath”, “The Stairs in the
Crypt”, “Shaggai”, “In the Vale of Pnath”, and “The Feaster
from the Stars”—and painted seven canvases; studies of nameless, unhuman monsters,
and profoundly alien, non-terrestrial landscapes.
At sunset he would often sit at his desk and gaze dreamily off at the outspread
west—the dark towers of Memorial Hall just below, the Georgian court-house belfry, the
lofty pinnacles of the downtown section, and that shimmering, spire-crowned mound in the distance
whose unknown streets and labyrinthine gables so potently provoked his fancy. From his few local
acquaintances he learned that the far-off slope was a vast Italian quarter, though most of the
houses were remnants of older Yankee and Irish days. Now and then he would train his field-glasses
on that spectral, unreachable world beyond the curling smoke; picking out individual roofs and
chimneys and steeples, and speculating upon the bizarre and curious mysteries they might house.
Even with optical aid Federal Hill seemed somehow alien, half fabulous, and linked to the unreal,
intangible marvels of Blake’s own tales and pictures. The feeling would persist long after
the hill had faded into the violet, lamp-starred twilight, and the court-house floodlights and
the red Industrial Trust beacon had blazed up to make the night grotesque.
Of all the distant objects on Federal Hill, a certain huge, dark church most
fascinated Blake. It stood out with especial distinctness at certain hours of the day, and at
sunset the great tower and tapering steeple loomed blackly against the flaming sky. It seemed
to rest on especially high ground; for the grimy facade, and the obliquely seen north side with
sloping roof and the tops of great pointed windows, rose boldly above the tangle of surrounding
ridgepoles and chimney-pots. Peculiarly grim and austere, it appeared to be built of stone,
stained and weathered with the smoke and storms of a century and more. The style, so far as
the glass could shew, was that earliest experimental form of Gothic revival which preceded the
stately Upjohn period and held over some of the outlines and proportions of the Georgian age.
Perhaps it was reared around 1810 or 1815.
As months passed, Blake watched the far-off, forbidding structure with an oddly
mounting interest. Since the vast windows were never lighted, he knew that it must be vacant.
The longer he watched, the more his imagination worked, till at length he began to fancy curious
things. He believed that a vague, singular aura of desolation hovered over the place, so that
even the pigeons and swallows shunned its smoky eaves. Around other towers and belfries his
glass would reveal great flocks of birds, but here they never rested. At least, that is what
he thought and set down in his diary. He pointed the place out to several friends, but none
of them had even been on Federal Hill or possessed the faintest notion of what the church was
or had been.
In the spring a deep restlessness gripped Blake. He had begun his long-planned
novel—based on a supposed survival of the witch-cult in Maine—but was strangely
unable to make progress with it. More and more he would sit at his westward window and gaze
at the distant hill and the black, frowning steeple shunned by the birds. When the delicate
leaves came out on the garden boughs the world was filled with a new beauty, but Blake’s
restlessness was merely increased. It was then that he first thought of crossing the city and
climbing bodily up that fabulous slope into the smoke-wreathed world of dream.
Late in April, just before the aeon-shadowed Walpurgis time, Blake made his
first trip into the unknown. Plodding through the endless downtown streets and the bleak, decayed
squares beyond, he came finally upon the ascending avenue of century-worn steps, sagging Doric
porches, and blear-paned cupolas which he felt must lead up to the long-known, unreachable world
beyond the mists. There were dingy blue-and-white street signs which meant nothing to him, and
presently he noted the strange, dark faces of the drifting crowds, and the foreign signs over
curious shops in brown, decade-weathered buildings. Nowhere could he find any of the objects
he had seen from afar; so that once more he half fancied that the Federal Hill of that distant
view was a dream-world never to be trod by living human feet.
Now and then a battered church facade or crumbling spire came in sight, but
never the blackened pile that he sought. When he asked a shopkeeper about a great stone church
the man smiled and shook his head, though he spoke English freely. As Blake climbed higher,
the region seemed stranger and stranger, with bewildering mazes of brooding brown alleys leading
eternally off to the south. He crossed two or three broad avenues, and once thought he glimpsed
a familiar tower. Again he asked a merchant about the massive church of stone, and this time
he could have sworn that the plea of ignorance was feigned. The dark man’s face had a
look of fear which he tried to hide, and Blake saw him make a curious sign with his right hand.
Then suddenly a black spire stood out against the cloudy sky on his left, above
the tiers of brown roofs lining the tangled southerly alleys. Blake knew at once what it was,
and plunged toward it through the squalid, unpaved lanes that climbed from the avenue. Twice
he lost his way, but he somehow dared not ask any of the patriarchs or housewives who sat on
their doorsteps, or any of the children who shouted and played in the mud of the shadowy lanes.
At last he saw the tower plain against the southwest, and a huge stone bulk
rose darkly at the end of an alley. Presently he stood in a windswept open square, quaintly
cobblestoned, with a high bank wall on the farther side. This was the end of his quest; for
upon the wide, iron-railed, weed-grown plateau which the wall supported—a separate, lesser
world raised fully six feet above the surrounding streets—there stood a grim, titan bulk
whose identity, despite Blake’s new perspective, was beyond dispute.
The vacant church was in a state of great decrepitude. Some of the high stone
buttresses had fallen, and several delicate finials lay half lost among the brown, neglected
weeds and grasses. The sooty Gothic windows were largely unbroken, though many of the stone
mullions were missing. Blake wondered how the obscurely painted panes could have survived so
well, in view of the known habits of small boys the world over. The massive doors were intact
and tightly closed. Around the top of the bank wall, fully enclosing the grounds, was a rusty
iron fence whose gate—at the head of a flight of steps from the square—was visibly
padlocked. The path from the gate to the building was completely overgrown. Desolation and decay
hung like a pall above the place, and in the birdless eaves and black, ivyless walls Blake felt
a touch of the dimly sinister beyond his power to define.
There were very few people in the square, but Blake saw a policeman at the
northerly end and approached him with questions about the church. He was a great wholesome Irishman,
and it seemed odd that he would do little more than make the sign of the cross and mutter that
people never spoke of that building. When Blake pressed him he said very hurriedly that the
Italian priests warned everybody against it, vowing that a monstrous evil had once dwelt there
and left its mark. He himself had heard dark whispers of it from his father, who recalled certain
sounds and rumours from his boyhood.
There had been a bad sect there in the ould days—an outlaw sect that
called up awful things from some unknown gulf of night. It had taken a good priest to exorcise
what had come, though there did be those who said that merely the light could do it. If Father
O’Malley were alive there would be many the thing he could tell. But now there was nothing
to do but let it alone. It hurt nobody now, and those that owned it were dead or far away. They
had run away like rats after the threatening talk in ’77, when people began to mind the
way folks vanished now and then in the neighbourhood. Some day the city would step in and take
the property for lack of heirs, but little good would come of anybody’s touching it. Better
it be left alone for the years to topple, lest things be stirred that ought to rest forever
in their black abyss.
After the policeman had gone Blake stood staring at the sullen steepled pile.
It excited him to find that the structure seemed as sinister to others as to him, and he wondered
what grain of truth might lie behind the old tales the bluecoat had repeated. Probably they
were mere legends evoked by the evil look of the place, but even so, they were like a strange
coming to life of one of his own stories.
The afternoon sun came out from behind dispersing clouds, but seemed unable
to light up the stained, sooty walls of the old temple that towered on its high plateau. It
was odd that the green of spring had not touched the brown, withered growths in the raised,
iron-fenced yard. Blake found himself edging nearer the raised area and examining the bank wall
and rusted fence for possible avenues of ingress. There was a terrible lure about the blackened
fane which was not to be resisted. The fence had no opening near the steps, but around on the
north side were some missing bars. He could go up the steps and walk around on the narrow coping
outside the fence till he came to the gap. If the people feared the place so wildly, he would
encounter no interference.
He was on the embankment and almost inside the fence before anyone noticed
him. Then, looking down, he saw the few people in the square edging away and making the same
sign with their right hands that the shopkeeper in the avenue had made. Several windows were
slammed down, and a fat woman darted into the street and pulled some small children inside a
rickety, unpainted house. The gap in the fence was very easy to pass through, and before long
Blake found himself wading amidst the rotting, tangled growths of the deserted yard. Here and
there the worn stump of a headstone told him that there had once been burials in this field;
but that, he saw, must have been very long ago. The sheer bulk of the church was oppressive
now that he was close to it, but he conquered his mood and approached to try the three great
doors in the facade. All were securely locked, so he began a circuit of the Cyclopean building
in quest of some minor and more penetrable opening. Even then he could not be sure that he wished
to enter that haunt of desertion and shadow, yet the pull of its strangeness dragged him on
automatically.
A yawning and unprotected cellar window in the rear furnished the needed aperture.
Peering in, Blake saw a subterrene gulf of cobwebs and dust faintly litten by the western sun’s
filtered rays. Debris, old barrels, and ruined boxes and furniture of numerous sorts met his
eye, though over everything lay a shroud of dust which softened all sharp outlines. The rusted
remains of a hot-air furnace shewed that the building had been used and kept in shape as late
as mid-Victorian times.
Acting almost without conscious initiative, Blake crawled through the window
and let himself down to the dust-carpeted and debris-strown concrete floor. The vaulted cellar
was a vast one, without partitions; and in a corner far to the right, amid dense shadows, he
saw a black archway evidently leading upstairs. He felt a peculiar sense of oppression at being
actually within the great spectral building, but kept it in check as he cautiously scouted about—finding
a still-intact barrel amid the dust, and rolling it over to the open window to provide for his
exit. Then, bracing himself, he crossed the wide, cobweb-festooned space toward the arch. Half
choked with the omnipresent dust, and covered with ghostly gossamer fibres, he reached and began
to climb the worn stone steps which rose into the darkness. He had no light, but groped carefully
with his hands. After a sharp turn he felt a closed door ahead, and a little fumbling revealed
its ancient latch. It opened inward, and beyond it he saw a dimly illumined corridor lined with
worm-eaten panelling.
Once on the ground floor, Blake began exploring in a rapid fashion. All the
inner doors were unlocked, so that he freely passed from room to room. The colossal nave was
an almost eldritch place with its drifts and mountains of dust over box pews, altar, hourglass
pulpit, and sounding-board, and its titanic ropes of cobweb stretching among the pointed arches
of the gallery and entwining the clustered Gothic columns. Over all this hushed desolation played
a hideous leaden light as the declining afternoon sun sent its rays through the strange, half-blackened
panes of the great apsidal windows.
The paintings on those windows were so obscured by soot that Blake could scarcely
decipher what they had represented, but from the little he could make out he did not like them.
The designs were largely conventional, and his knowledge of obscure symbolism told him much
concerning some of the ancient patterns. The few saints depicted bore expressions distinctly
open to criticism, while one of the windows seemed to shew merely a dark space with spirals
of curious luminosity scattered about in it. Turning away from the windows, Blake noticed that
the cobwebbed cross above the altar was not of the ordinary kind, but resembled the primordial
ankh or crux ansata of shadowy Egypt.
In a rear vestry room beside the apse Blake found a rotting desk and ceiling-high
shelves of mildewed, disintegrating books. Here for the first time he received a positive shock
of objective horror, for the titles of those books told him much. They were the black, forbidden
things which most sane people have never even heard of, or have heard of only in furtive, timorous
whispers; the banned and dreaded repositories of equivocal secrets and immemorial formulae which
have trickled down the stream of time from the days of man’s youth, and the dim, fabulous
days before man was. He had himself read many of them—a Latin version of the abhorred
Necronomicon, the sinister Liber Ivonis, the infamous Cultes des Goules
of Comte d’Erlette, the Unaussprechlichen Kulten of von Junzt, and old Ludvig Prinn’s
hellish De Vermis Mysteriis. But there were others he had known merely by reputation
or not at all—the Pnakotic Manuscripts, the Book of Dzyan, and a crumbling volume
in wholly unidentifiable characters yet with certain symbols and diagrams shudderingly recognisable
to the occult student. Clearly, the lingering local rumours had not lied. This place had once
been the seat of an evil older than mankind and wider than the known universe.
In the ruined desk was a small leather-bound record-book filled with entries
in some odd cryptographic medium. The manuscript writing consisted of the common traditional
symbols used today in astronomy and anciently in alchemy, astrology, and other dubious arts—the
devices of the sun, moon, planets, aspects, and zodiacal signs—here massed in solid pages
of text, with divisions and paragraphings suggesting that each symbol answered to some alphabetical
letter.
In the hope of later solving the cryptogram, Blake bore off this volume in
his coat pocket. Many of the great tomes on the shelves fascinated him unutterably, and he felt
tempted to borrow them at some later time. He wondered how they could have remained undisturbed
so long. Was he the first to conquer the clutching, pervasive fear which had for nearly sixty
years protected this deserted place from visitors?
Having now thoroughly explored the ground floor, Blake ploughed again through
the dust of the spectral nave to the front vestibule, where he had seen a door and staircase
presumably leading up to the blackened tower and steeple—objects so long familiar to him
at a distance. The ascent was a choking experience, for dust lay thick, while the spiders had
done their worst in this constricted place. The staircase was a spiral with high, narrow wooden
treads, and now and then Blake passed a clouded window looking dizzily out over the city. Though
he had seen no ropes below, he expected to find a bell or peal of bells in the tower whose narrow,
louver-boarded lancet windows his field-glass had studied so often. Here he was doomed to disappointment;
for when he attained the top of the stairs he found the tower chamber vacant of chimes, and
clearly devoted to vastly different purposes.
The room, about fifteen feet square, was faintly lighted by four lancet windows,
one on each side, which were glazed within their screening of decayed louver-boards. These had
been further fitted with tight, opaque screens, but the latter were now largely rotted away.
In the centre of the dust-laden floor rose a curiously angled stone pillar some four feet in
height and two in average diameter, covered on each side with bizarre, crudely incised, and
wholly unrecognisable hieroglyphs. On this pillar rested a metal box of peculiarly asymmetrical
form; its hinged lid thrown back, and its interior holding what looked beneath the decade-deep
dust to be an egg-shaped or irregularly spherical object some four inches through. Around the
pillar in a rough circle were seven high-backed Gothic chairs still largely intact, while behind
them, ranging along the dark-panelled walls, were seven colossal images of crumbling, black-painted
plaster, resembling more than anything else the cryptic carven megaliths of mysterious Easter
Island. In one corner of the cobwebbed chamber a ladder was built into the wall, leading up
to the closed trap-door of the windowless steeple above.
As Blake grew accustomed to the feeble light he noticed odd bas-reliefs on
the strange open box of yellowish metal. Approaching, he tried to clear the dust away with his
hands and handkerchief, and saw that the figurings were of a monstrous and utterly alien kind;
depicting entities which, though seemingly alive, resembled no known life-form ever evolved
on this planet. The four-inch seeming sphere turned out to be a nearly black, red-striated polyhedron
with many irregular flat surfaces; either a very remarkable crystal of some sort, or an artificial
object of carved and highly polished mineral matter. It did not touch the bottom of the box,
but was held suspended by means of a metal band around its centre, with seven queerly designed
supports extending horizontally to angles of the box’s inner wall near the top. This stone,
once exposed, exerted upon Blake an almost alarming fascination. He could scarcely tear his
eyes from it, and as he looked at its glistening surfaces he almost fancied it was transparent,
with half-formed worlds of wonder within. Into his mind floated pictures of alien orbs with
great stone towers, and other orbs with titan mountains and no mark of life, and still remoter
spaces where only a stirring in vague blacknesses told of the presence of consciousness and
will.
When he did look away, it was to notice a somewhat singular mound of dust in
the far corner near the ladder to the steeple. Just why it took his attention he could not tell,
but something in its contours carried a message to his unconscious mind. Ploughing toward it,
and brushing aside the hanging cobwebs as he went, he began to discern something grim about
it. Hand and handkerchief soon revealed the truth, and Blake gasped with a baffling mixture
of emotions. It was a human skeleton, and it must have been there for a very long time. The
clothing was in shreds, but some buttons and fragments of cloth bespoke a man’s grey suit.
There were other bits of evidence—shoes, metal clasps, huge buttons for round cuffs, a
stickpin of bygone pattern, a reporter’s badge with the name of the old Providence
Telegram, and a crumbling leather pocketbook. Blake examined the latter with care, finding
within it several bills of antiquated issue, a celluloid advertising calendar for 1893, some
cards with the name “Edwin M. Lillibridge”, and a paper covered with pencilled memoranda.
This paper held much of a puzzling nature, and Blake read it carefully at the
dim westward window. Its disjointed text included such phrases as the following:
“Prof. Enoch Bowen home from Egypt May 1844—buys old Free-Will Church
in July—his archaeological work & studies in occult well known.”
“Dr. Drowne of 4th Baptist warns against Starry Wisdom in sermon Dec.
29, 1844.”
“Congregation 97 by end of ’45.”
“1846—3 disappearances—first mention of Shining Trapezohedron.”
“7 disappearances 1848—stories of blood sacrifice begin.”
“Investigation 1853 comes to nothing—stories of sounds.”
“Fr. O’Malley tells of devil-worship with box found in great Egyptian
ruins—says they call up something that can’t exist in light. Flees a little light,
and banished by strong light. Then has to be summoned again. Probably got this from deathbed
confession of Francis X. Feeney, who had joined Starry Wisdom in ’49. These people say
the Shining Trapezohedron shews them heaven & other worlds, & that the Haunter of the
Dark tells them secrets in some way.”
“Story of Orrin B. Eddy 1857. They call it up by gazing at the crystal,
& have a secret language of their own.”
“200 or more in cong. 1863, exclusive of men at front.”
“Irish boys mob church in 1869 after Patrick Regan’s disappearance.”
“Veiled article in J. March 14, ’72, but people don’t talk
about it.”
“6 disappearances 1876—secret committee calls on Mayor Doyle.”
“Action promised Feb. 1877—church closes in April.”
“Gang—Federal Hill Boys—threaten Dr. —— and vestrymen
in May.”
“181 persons leave city before end of ’77—mention no names.”
“Ghost stories begin around 1880—try to ascertain truth of report
that no human being has entered church since 1877.”
“Ask Lanigan for photograph of place taken 1851.” . . .
Restoring the paper to the pocketbook and placing the latter in his coat, Blake
turned to look down at the skeleton in the dust. The implications of the notes were clear, and
there could be no doubt but that this man had come to the deserted edifice forty-two years before
in quest of a newspaper sensation which no one else had been bold enough to attempt. Perhaps
no one else had known of his plan—who could tell? But he had never returned to his paper.
Had some bravely suppressed fear risen to overcome him and bring on sudden heart-failure? Blake
stooped over the gleaming bones and noted their peculiar state. Some of them were badly scattered,
and a few seemed oddly dissolved at the ends. Others were strangely yellowed, with vague
suggestions of charring. This charring extended to some of the fragments of clothing. The skull
was in a very peculiar state—stained yellow, and with a charred aperture in the top as
if some powerful acid had eaten through the solid bone. What had happened to the skeleton during
its four decades of silent entombment here Blake could not imagine.
Before he realised it, he was looking at the stone again, and letting its curious
influence call up a nebulous pageantry in his mind. He saw processions of robed, hooded figures
whose outlines were not human, and looked on endless leagues of desert lined with carved, sky-reaching
monoliths. He saw towers and walls in nighted depths under the sea, and vortices of space where
wisps of black mist floated before thin shimmerings of cold purple haze. And beyond all else
he glimpsed an infinite gulf of darkness, where solid and semi-solid forms were known only by
their windy stirrings, and cloudy patterns of force seemed to superimpose order on chaos and
hold forth a key to all the paradoxes and arcana of the worlds we know.
Then all at once the spell was broken by an access of gnawing, indeterminate
panic fear. Blake choked and turned away from the stone, conscious of some formless alien presence
close to him and watching him with horrible intentness. He felt entangled with something—something
which was not in the stone, but which had looked through it at him—something which would
ceaselessly follow him with a cognition that was not physical sight. Plainly, the place was
getting on his nerves—as well it might in view of his gruesome find. The light was waning,
too, and since he had no illuminant with him he knew he would have to be leaving soon.
It was then, in the gathering twilight, that he thought he saw a faint trace
of luminosity in the crazily angled stone. He had tried to look away from it, but some obscure
compulsion drew his eyes back. Was there a subtle phosphorescence of radio-activity about the
thing? What was it that the dead man’s notes had said concerning a Shining Trapezohedron?
What, anyway, was this abandoned lair of cosmic evil? What had been done here, and what might
still be lurking in the bird-shunned shadows? It seemed now as if an elusive touch of foetor
had arisen somewhere close by, though its source was not apparent. Blake seized the cover of
the long-open box and snapped it down. It moved easily on its alien hinges, and closed completely
over the unmistakably glowing stone.
At the sharp click of that closing a soft stirring sound seemed to come from
the steeple’s eternal blackness overhead, beyond the trap-door. Rats, without question—the
only living things to reveal their presence in this accursed pile since he had entered it. And
yet that stirring in the steeple frightened him horribly, so that he plunged almost wildly down
the spiral stairs, across the ghoulish nave, into the vaulted basement, out amidst the gathering
dusk of the deserted square, and down through the teeming, fear-haunted alleys and avenues of
Federal Hill toward the sane central streets and the home-like brick sidewalks of the college
district.
During the days which followed, Blake told no one of his expedition. Instead,
he read much in certain books, examined long years of newspaper files downtown, and worked feverishly
at the cryptogram in that leather volume from the cobwebbed vestry room. The cipher, he soon
saw, was no simple one; and after a long period of endeavour he felt sure that its language
could not be English, Latin, Greek, French, Spanish, Italian, or German. Evidently he would
have to draw upon the deepest wells of his strange erudition.
Every evening the old impulse to gaze westward returned, and he saw the black
steeple as of yore amongst the bristling roofs of a distant and half-fabulous world. But now
it held a fresh note of terror for him. He knew the heritage of evil lore it masked, and with
the knowledge his vision ran riot in queer new ways. The birds of spring were returning, and
as he watched their sunset flights he fancied they avoided the gaunt, lone spire as never before.
When a flock of them approached it, he thought, they would wheel and scatter in panic confusion—and
he could guess at the wild twitterings which failed to reach him across the intervening miles.
It was in June that Blake’s diary told of his victory over the cryptogram.
The text was, he found, in the dark Aklo language used by certain cults of evil antiquity, and
known to him in a halting way through previous researches. The diary is strangely reticent about
what Blake deciphered, but he was patently awed and disconcerted by his results. There are references
to a Haunter of the Dark awaked by gazing into the Shining Trapezohedron, and insane conjectures
about the black gulfs of chaos from which it was called. The being is spoken of as holding all
knowledge, and demanding monstrous sacrifices. Some of Blake’s entries shew fear lest
the thing, which he seemed to regard as summoned, stalk abroad; though he adds that the street-lights
form a bulwark which cannot be crossed.
Of the Shining Trapezohedron he speaks often, calling it a window on all time
and space, and tracing its history from the days it was fashioned on dark Yuggoth, before ever
the Old Ones brought it to earth. It was treasured and placed in its curious box by the crinoid
things of Antarctica, salvaged from their ruins by the serpent-men of Valusia, and peered at
aeons later in Lemuria by the first human beings. It crossed strange lands and stranger seas,
and sank with Atlantis before a Minoan fisher meshed it in his net and sold it to swarthy merchants
from nighted Khem. The Pharaoh Nephren-Ka built around it a temple with a windowless crypt,
and did that which caused his name to be stricken from all monuments and records. Then it slept
in the ruins of that evil fane which the priests and the new Pharaoh destroyed, till the delver’s
spade once more brought it forth to curse mankind.
Early in July the newspapers oddly supplement Blake’s entries, though
in so brief and casual a way that only the diary has called general attention to their contribution.
It appears that a new fear had been growing on Federal Hill since a stranger had entered the
dreaded church. The Italians whispered of unaccustomed stirrings and bumpings and scrapings
in the dark windowless steeple, and called on their priests to banish an entity which haunted
their dreams. Something, they said, was constantly watching at a door to see if it were dark
enough to venture forth. Press items mentioned the long-standing local superstitions, but failed
to shed much light on the earlier background of the horror. It was obvious that the young reporters
of today are no antiquarians. In writing of these things in his diary, Blake expresses a curious
kind of remorse, and talks of the duty of burying the Shining Trapezohedron and of banishing
what he had evoked by letting daylight into the hideous jutting spire. At the same time, however,
he displays the dangerous extent of his fascination, and admits a morbid longing—pervading
even his dreams—to visit the accursed tower and gaze again into the cosmic secrets of
the glowing stone.
Then something in the Journal on the morning of July 17 threw the diarist
into a veritable fever of horror. It was only a variant of the other half-humorous items about
the Federal Hill restlessness, but to Blake it was somehow very terrible indeed. In the night
a thunderstorm had put the city’s lighting-system out of commission for a full hour, and
in that black interval the Italians had nearly gone mad with fright. Those living near the dreaded
church had sworn that the thing in the steeple had taken advantage of the street-lamps’
absence and gone down into the body of the church, flopping and bumping around in a viscous,
altogether dreadful way. Toward the last it had bumped up to the tower, where there were sounds
of the shattering of glass. It could go wherever the darkness reached, but light would always
send it fleeing.
When the current blazed on again there had been a shocking commotion in the
tower, for even the feeble light trickling through the grime-blackened, louver-boarded windows
was too much for the thing. It had bumped and slithered up into its tenebrous steeple just in
time—for a long dose of light would have sent it back into the abyss whence the crazy
stranger had called it. During the dark hour praying crowds had clustered round the church in
the rain with lighted candles and lamps somehow shielded with folded paper and umbrellas—a
guard of light to save the city from the nightmare that stalks in darkness. Once, those nearest
the church declared, the outer door had rattled hideously.
But even this was not the worst. That evening in the Bulletin Blake
read of what the reporters had found. Aroused at last to the whimsical news value of the scare,
a pair of them had defied the frantic crowds of Italians and crawled into the church through
the cellar window after trying the doors in vain. They found the dust of the vestibule and of
the spectral nave ploughed up in a singular way, with bits of rotted cushions and satin pew-linings
scattered curiously around. There was a bad odour everywhere, and here and there were bits of
yellow stain and patches of what looked like charring. Opening the door to the tower, and pausing
a moment at the suspicion of a scraping sound above, they found the narrow spiral stairs wiped
roughly clean.
In the tower itself a similarly half-swept condition existed. They spoke of
the heptagonal stone pillar, the overturned Gothic chairs, and the bizarre plaster images; though
strangely enough the metal box and the old mutilated skeleton were not mentioned. What disturbed
Blake the most—except for the hints of stains and charring and bad odours—was the
final detail that explained the crashing glass. Every one of the tower’s lancet windows
was broken, and two of them had been darkened in a crude and hurried way by the stuffing of
satin pew-linings and cushion-horsehair into the spaces between the slanting exterior louver-boards.
More satin fragments and bunches of horsehair lay scattered around the newly swept floor, as
if someone had been interrupted in the act of restoring the tower to the absolute blackness
of its tightly curtained days.
Yellowish stains and charred patches were found on the ladder to the windowless
spire, but when a reporter climbed up, opened the horizontally sliding trap-door, and shot a
feeble flashlight beam into the black and strangely foetid space, he saw nothing but darkness,
and an heterogeneous litter of shapeless fragments near the aperture. The verdict, of course,
was charlatanry. Somebody had played a joke on the superstitious hill-dwellers, or else some
fanatic had striven to bolster up their fears for their own supposed good. Or perhaps some of
the younger and more sophisticated dwellers had staged an elaborate hoax on the outside world.
There was an amusing aftermath when the police sent an officer to verify the reports. Three
men in succession found ways of evading the assignment, and the fourth went very reluctantly
and returned very soon without adding to the account given by the reporters.
From this point onward Blake’s diary shews a mounting tide of insidious
horror and nervous apprehension. He upbraids himself for not doing something, and speculates
wildly on the consequences of another electrical breakdown. It has been verified that on three
occasions—during thunderstorms—he telephoned the electric light company in a frantic
vein and asked that desperate precautions against a lapse of power be taken. Now and then his
entries shew concern over the failure of the reporters to find the metal box and stone, and
the strangely marred old skeleton, when they explored the shadowy tower room. He assumed that
these things had been removed—whither, and by whom or what, he could only guess. But his
worst fears concerned himself, and the kind of unholy rapport he felt to exist between his mind
and that lurking horror in the distant steeple—that monstrous thing of night which his
rashness had called out of the ultimate black spaces. He seemed to feel a constant tugging at
his will, and callers of that period remember how he would sit abstractedly at his desk and
stare out of the west window at that far-off, spire-bristling mound beyond the swirling smoke
of the city. His entries dwell monotonously on certain terrible dreams, and of a strengthening
of the unholy rapport in his sleep. There is mention of a night when he awaked to find himself
fully dressed, outdoors, and headed automatically down College Hill toward the west. Again and
again he dwells on the fact that the thing in the steeple knows where to find him.
The week following July 30 is recalled as the time of Blake’s partial
breakdown. He did not dress, and ordered all his food by telephone. Visitors remarked the cords
he kept near his bed, and he said that sleep-walking had forced him to bind his ankles every
night with knots which would probably hold or else waken him with the labour of untying.
In his diary he told of the hideous experience which had brought the collapse.
After retiring on the night of the 30th he had suddenly found himself groping about in an almost
black space. All he could see were short, faint, horizontal streaks of bluish light, but he
could smell an overpowering foetor and hear a curious jumble of soft, furtive sounds above him.
Whenever he moved he stumbled over something, and at each noise there would come a sort of answering
sound from above—a vague stirring, mixed with the cautious sliding of wood on wood.
Once his groping hands encountered a pillar of stone with a vacant top, whilst
later he found himself clutching the rungs of a ladder built into the wall, and fumbling his
uncertain way upward toward some region of intenser stench where a hot, searing blast beat down
against him. Before his eyes a kaleidoscopic range of phantasmal images played, all of them
dissolving at intervals into the picture of a vast, unplumbed abyss of night wherein whirled
suns and worlds of an even profounder blackness. He thought of the ancient legends of Ultimate
Chaos, at whose centre sprawls the blind idiot god Azathoth, Lord of All Things, encircled by
his flopping horde of mindless and amorphous dancers, and lulled by the thin monotonous piping
of a daemoniac flute held in nameless paws.
Then a sharp report from the outer world broke through his stupor and roused
him to the unutterable horror of his position. What it was, he never knew—perhaps it was
some belated peal from the fireworks heard all summer on Federal Hill as the dwellers hail their
various patron saints, or the saints of their native villages in Italy. In any event he shrieked
aloud, dropped frantically from the ladder, and stumbled blindly across the obstructed floor
of the almost lightless chamber that encompassed him.
He knew instantly where he was, and plunged recklessly down the narrow spiral
staircase, tripping and bruising himself at every turn. There was a nightmare flight through
a vast cobwebbed nave whose ghostly arches reached up to realms of leering shadow, a sightless
scramble through a littered basement, a climb to regions of air and street-lights outside, and
a mad racing down a spectral hill of gibbering gables, across a grim, silent city of tall black
towers, and up the steep eastward precipice to his own ancient door.
On regaining consciousness in the morning he found himself lying on his study
floor fully dressed. Dirt and cobwebs covered him, and every inch of his body seemed sore and
bruised. When he faced the mirror he saw that his hair was badly scorched, while a trace of
strange, evil odour seemed to cling to his upper outer clothing. It was then that his nerves
broke down. Thereafter, lounging exhaustedly about in a dressing-gown, he did little but stare
from his west window, shiver at the threat of thunder, and make wild entries in his diary.
The great storm broke just before midnight on August 8th. Lightning struck
repeatedly in all parts of the city, and two remarkable fireballs were reported. The rain was
torrential, while a constant fusillade of thunder brought sleeplessness to thousands. Blake
was utterly frantic in his fear for the lighting system, and tried to telephone the company
around 1 a.m., though by that time service had been temporarily cut off in the interest of safety.
He recorded everything in his diary—the large, nervous, and often undecipherable hieroglyphs
telling their own story of growing frenzy and despair, and of entries scrawled blindly in the
dark.
He had to keep the house dark in order to see out the window, and it appears
that most of his time was spent at his desk, peering anxiously through the rain across the glistening
miles of downtown roofs at the constellation of distant lights marking Federal Hill. Now and
then he would fumblingly make an entry in his diary, so that detached phrases such as “The
lights must not go”; “It knows where I am”; “I must destroy it”;
and “It is calling to me, but perhaps it means no injury this time”; are found scattered
down two of the pages.
Then the lights went out all over the city. It happened at 2:12 a.m. according
to power-house records, but Blake’s diary gives no indication of the time. The entry is
merely, “Lights out—God help me.” On Federal Hill there were watchers as anxious
as he, and rain-soaked knots of men paraded the square and alleys around the evil church with
umbrella-shaded candles, electric flashlights, oil lanterns, crucifixes, and obscure charms
of the many sorts common to southern Italy. They blessed each flash of lightning, and made cryptical
signs of fear with their right hands when a turn in the storm caused the flashes to lessen and
finally to cease altogether. A rising wind blew out most of the candles, so that the scene grew
threateningly dark. Someone roused Father Merluzzo of Spirito Santo Church, and he hastened
to the dismal square to pronounce whatever helpful syllables he could. Of the restless and curious
sounds in the blackened tower, there could be no doubt whatever.
For what happened at 2:35 we have the testimony of the priest, a young, intelligent,
and well-educated person; of Patrolman William J. Monahan of the Central Station, an officer
of the highest reliability who had paused at that part of his beat to inspect the crowd; and
of most of the seventy-eight men who had gathered around the church’s high bank wall—especially
those in the square where the eastward facade was visible. Of course there was nothing which
can be proved as being outside the order of Nature. The possible causes of such an event are
many. No one can speak with certainty of the obscure chemical processes arising in a vast, ancient,
ill-aired, and long-deserted building of heterogeneous contents. Mephitic vapours—spontaneous
combustion—pressure of gases born of long decay—any one of numberless phenomena
might be responsible. And then, of course, the factor of conscious charlatanry can by no means
be excluded. The thing was really quite simple in itself, and covered less than three minutes
of actual time. Father Merluzzo, always a precise man, looked at his watch repeatedly.
It started with a definite swelling of the dull fumbling sounds inside the
black tower. There had for some time been a vague exhalation of strange, evil odours from the
church, and this had now become emphatic and offensive. Then at last there was a sound of splintering
wood, and a large, heavy object crashed down in the yard beneath the frowning easterly facade.
The tower was invisible now that the candles would not burn, but as the object neared the ground
the people knew that it was the smoke-grimed louver-boarding of that tower’s east window.
Immediately afterward an utterly unbearable foetor welled forth from the unseen
heights, choking and sickening the trembling watchers, and almost prostrating those in the square.
At the same time the air trembled with a vibration as of flapping wings, and a sudden east-blowing
wind more violent than any previous blast snatched off the hats and wrenched the dripping umbrellas
of the crowd. Nothing definite could be seen in the candleless night, though some upward-looking
spectators thought they glimpsed a great spreading blur of denser blackness against the inky
sky—something like a formless cloud of smoke that shot with meteor-like speed toward the
east.
That was all. The watchers were half numbed with fright, awe, and discomfort,
and scarcely knew what to do, or whether to do anything at all. Not knowing what had happened,
they did not relax their vigil; and a moment later they sent up a prayer as a sharp flash of
belated lightning, followed by an earsplitting crash of sound, rent the flooded heavens. Half
an hour later the rain stopped, and in fifteen minutes more the street-lights sprang on again,
sending the weary, bedraggled watchers relievedly back to their homes.
The next day’s papers gave these matters minor mention in connexion with
the general storm reports. It seems that the great lightning flash and deafening explosion which
followed the Federal Hill occurrence were even more tremendous farther east, where a burst of
the singular foetor was likewise noticed. The phenomenon was most marked over College Hill,
where the crash awaked all the sleeping inhabitants and led to a bewildered round of speculations.
Of those who were already awake only a few saw the anomalous blaze of light near the top of
the hill, or noticed the inexplicable upward rush of air which almost stripped the leaves from
the trees and blasted the plants in the gardens. It was agreed that the lone, sudden lightning-bolt
must have struck somewhere in this neighbourhood, though no trace of its striking could afterward
be found. A youth in the Tau Omega fraternity house thought he saw a grotesque and hideous mass
of smoke in the air just as the preliminary flash burst, but his observation has not been verified.
All of the few observers, however, agree as to the violent gust from the west and the flood
of intolerable stench which preceded the belated stroke; whilst evidence concerning the momentary
burned odour after the stroke is equally general.
These points were discussed very carefully because of their probable connexion
with the death of Robert Blake. Students in the Psi Delta house, whose upper rear windows looked
into Blake’s study, noticed the blurred white face at the westward window on the morning
of the 9th, and wondered what was wrong with the expression. When they saw the same face in
the same position that evening, they felt worried, and watched for the lights to come up in
his apartment. Later they rang the bell of the darkened flat, and finally had a policeman force
the door.
The rigid body sat bolt upright at the desk by the window, and when the intruders
saw the glassy, bulging eyes, and the marks of stark, convulsive fright on the twisted features,
they turned away in sickened dismay. Shortly afterward the coroner’s physician made an
examination, and despite the unbroken window reported electrical shock, or nervous tension induced
by electrical discharge, as the cause of death. The hideous expression he ignored altogether,
deeming it a not improbable result of the profound shock as experienced by a person of such
abnormal imagination and unbalanced emotions. He deduced these latter qualities from the books,
paintings, and manuscripts found in the apartment, and from the blindly scrawled entries in
the diary on the desk. Blake had prolonged his frenzied jottings to the last, and the broken-pointed
pencil was found clutched in his spasmodically contracted right hand.
The entries after the failure of the lights were highly disjointed, and legible
only in part. From them certain investigators have drawn conclusions differing greatly from
the materialistic official verdict, but such speculations have little chance for belief among
the conservative. The case of these imaginative theorists has not been helped by the action
of superstitious Dr. Dexter, who threw the curious box and angled stone—an object certainly
self-luminous as seen in the black windowless steeple where it was found—into the deepest
channel of Narragansett Bay. Excessive imagination and neurotic unbalance on Blake’s part,
aggravated by knowledge of the evil bygone cult whose startling traces he had uncovered, form
the dominant interpretation given those final frenzied jottings. These are the entries—or
all that can be made of them.

“Lights still out—must be five minutes now. Everything depends
on lightning. Yaddith grant it will keep up! . . . Some influence seems beating through
it. . . . Rain and thunder and wind deafen. . . . The thing is
taking hold of my mind. . . .
“Trouble with memory. I see things I never knew before. Other worlds
and other galaxies . . . Dark . . . The lightning seems dark and
the darkness seems light. . . .
“It cannot be the real hill and church that I see in the pitch-darkness.
Must be retinal impression left by flashes. Heaven grant the Italians are out with their candles
if the lightning stops!
“What am I afraid of? Is it not an avatar of Nyarlathotep, who in antique
and shadowy Khem even took the form of man? I remember Yuggoth, and more distant Shaggai, and
the ultimate void of the black planets. . . .
“The long, winging flight through the void . . . cannot
cross the universe of light . . . re-created by the thoughts caught in the Shining
Trapezohedron . . . send it through the horrible abysses of radiance. . . .
“My name is Blake—Robert Harrison Blake of 620 East Knapp Street,
Milwaukee, Wisconsin. . . . I am on this planet. . . .
“Azathoth have mercy!—the lightning no longer flashes—horrible—I
can see everything with a monstrous sense that is not sight—light is dark and dark is
light . . . those people on the hill . . . guard . . .
candles and charms . . . their priests. . . .
“Sense of distance gone—far is near and near is far. No light—no
glass—see that steeple—that tower—window—can hear—Roderick Usher—am
mad or going mad—the thing is stirring and fumbling in the tower—I am it and it
is I—I want to get out . . . must get out and unify the forces. . . .
It knows where I am. . . .
“I am Robert Blake, but I see the tower in the dark. There is a monstrous
odour . . . senses transfigured . . . boarding at that tower window
cracking and giving way. . . . Iä . . . ngai . . .
ygg. . . .
“I see it—coming here—hell-wind—titan blur—black
wings—Yog-Sothoth save me—the three-lobed burning eye. . . .”


The Horror at Red Hook

“There are sacraments of evil as well as of good about us, and we live and
move to my belief in an unknown world, a place where there are caves and shadows and dwellers
in twilight. It is possible that man may sometimes return on the track of evolution, and it
is my belief that an awful lore is not yet dead.”
—Arthur Machen.

I.

Not many weeks ago, on a street corner in the village of Pascoag, Rhode Island, a tall, heavily
built, and wholesome-looking pedestrian furnished much speculation by a singular lapse of behaviour.
He had, it appears, been descending the hill by the road from Chepachet; and encountering the
compact section, had turned to his left into the main thoroughfare where several modest business
blocks convey a touch of the urban. At this point, without visible provocation, he committed
his astonishing lapse; staring queerly for a second at the tallest of the buildings before him,
and then, with a series of terrified, hysterical shrieks, breaking into a frantic run which
ended in a stumble and fall at the next crossing. Picked up and dusted off by ready hands, he
was found to be conscious, organically unhurt, and evidently cured of his sudden nervous attack.
He muttered some shamefaced explanations involving a strain he had undergone, and with downcast
glance turned back up the Chepachet road, trudging out of sight without once looking behind
him. It was a strange incident to befall so large, robust, normal-featured, and capable-looking
a man, and the strangeness was not lessened by the remarks of a bystander who had recognised
him as the boarder of a well-known dairyman on the outskirts of Chepachet.
He was, it developed, a New York police detective named Thomas F. Malone, now
on a long leave of absence under medical treatment after some disproportionately arduous work
on a gruesome local case which accident had made dramatic. There had been a collapse of several
old brick buildings during a raid in which he had shared, and something about the wholesale
loss of life, both of prisoners and of his companions, had peculiarly appalled him. As a result,
he had acquired an acute and anomalous horror of any buildings even remotely suggesting the
ones which had fallen in, so that in the end mental specialists forbade him the sight of such
things for an indefinite period. A police surgeon with relatives in Chepachet had put forward
that quaint hamlet of wooden colonial houses as an ideal spot for the psychological convalescence;
and thither the sufferer had gone, promising never to venture among the brick-lined streets
of larger villages till duly advised by the Woonsocket specialist with whom he was put in touch.
This walk to Pascoag for magazines had been a mistake, and the patient had paid in fright, bruises,
and humiliation for his disobedience.
So much the gossips of Chepachet and Pascoag knew; and so much, also, the most
learned specialists believed. But Malone had at first told the specialists much more, ceasing
only when he saw that utter incredulity was his portion. Thereafter he held his peace, protesting
not at all when it was generally agreed that the collapse of certain squalid brick houses in
the Red Hook section of Brooklyn, and the consequent death of many brave officers, had unseated
his nervous equilibrium. He had worked too hard, all said, in trying to clean up those nests
of disorder and violence; certain features were shocking enough, in all conscience, and the
unexpected tragedy was the last straw. This was a simple explanation which everyone could understand,
and because Malone was not a simple person he perceived that he had better let it suffice. To
hint to unimaginative people of a horror beyond all human conception—a horror of houses
and blocks and cities leprous and cancerous with evil dragged from elder worlds—would
be merely to invite a padded cell instead of restful rustication, and Malone was a man of sense
despite his mysticism. He had the Celt’s far vision of weird and hidden things, but the
logician’s quick eye for the outwardly unconvincing; an amalgam which had led him far
afield in the forty-two years of his life, and set him in strange places for a Dublin University
man born in a Georgian villa near Phoenix Park.
And now, as he reviewed the things he had seen and felt and apprehended, Malone
was content to keep unshared the secret of what could reduce a dauntless fighter to a quivering
neurotic; what could make old brick slums and seas of dark, subtle faces a thing of nightmare
and eldritch portent. It would not be the first time his sensations had been forced to bide
uninterpreted—for was not his very act of plunging into the polyglot abyss of New York’s
underworld a freak beyond sensible explanation? What could he tell the prosaic of the antique
witcheries and grotesque marvels discernible to sensitive eyes amidst the poison cauldron where
all the varied dregs of unwholesome ages mix their venom and perpetuate their obscene terrors?
He had seen the hellish green flame of secret wonder in this blatant, evasive welter of outward
greed and inward blasphemy, and had smiled gently when all the New-Yorkers he knew scoffed at
his experiment in police work. They had been very witty and cynical, deriding his fantastic
pursuit of unknowable mysteries and assuring him that in these days New York held nothing but
cheapness and vulgarity. One of them had wagered him a heavy sum that he could not—despite
many poignant things to his credit in the Dublin Review—even write a truly interesting
story of New York low life; and now, looking back, he perceived that cosmic irony had justified
the prophet’s words while secretly confuting their flippant meaning. The horror, as glimpsed
at last, could not make a story—for like the book cited by Poe’s German authority,
“es lässt sich nicht lesen—it does not permit itself to be read.”
II.

To Malone the sense of latent mystery in existence was always present. In youth he had felt
the hidden beauty and ecstasy of things, and had been a poet; but poverty and sorrow and exile
had turned his gaze in darker directions, and he had thrilled at the imputations of evil in
the world around. Daily life had for him come to be a phantasmagoria of macabre shadow-studies;
now glittering and leering with concealed rottenness as in Beardsley’s best manner, now
hinting terrors behind the commonest shapes and objects as in the subtler and less obvious work
of Gustave Doré. He would often regard it as merciful that most persons of high intelligence
jeer at the inmost mysteries; for, he argued, if superior minds were ever placed in fullest
contact with the secrets preserved by ancient and lowly cults, the resultant abnormalities would
soon not only wreck the world, but threaten the very integrity of the universe. All this reflection
was no doubt morbid, but keen logic and a deep sense of humour ably offset it. Malone was satisfied
to let his notions remain as half-spied and forbidden visions to be lightly played with; and
hysteria came only when duty flung him into a hell of revelation too sudden and insidious to
escape.
He had for some time been detailed to the Butler Street station in Brooklyn
when the Red Hook matter came to his notice. Red Hook is a maze of hybrid squalor near the ancient
waterfront opposite Governor’s Island, with dirty highways climbing the hill from the
wharves to that higher ground where the decayed lengths of Clinton and Court Streets lead off
toward the Borough Hall. Its houses are mostly of brick, dating from the first quarter to the
middle of the nineteenth century, and some of the obscurer alleys and byways have that alluring
antique flavour which conventional reading leads us to call “Dickensian”. The population
is a hopeless tangle and enigma; Syrian, Spanish, Italian, and negro elements impinging upon
one another, and fragments of Scandinavian and American belts lying not far distant. It is a
babel of sound and filth, and sends out strange cries to answer the lapping of oily waves at
its grimy piers and the monstrous organ litanies of the harbour whistles. Here long ago a brighter
picture dwelt, with clear-eyed mariners on the lower streets and homes of taste and substance
where the larger houses line the hill. One can trace the relics of this former happiness in
the trim shapes of the buildings, the occasional graceful churches, and the evidences of original
art and background in bits of detail here and there—a worn flight of steps, a battered
doorway, a wormy pair of decorative columns or pilasters, or a fragment of once green space
with bent and rusted iron railing. The houses are generally in solid blocks, and now and then
a many-windowed cupola arises to tell of days when the households of captains and ship-owners
watched the sea.
From this tangle of material and spiritual putrescence the blasphemies of an
hundred dialects assail the sky. Hordes of prowlers reel shouting and singing along the lanes
and thoroughfares, occasional furtive hands suddenly extinguish lights and pull down curtains,
and swarthy, sin-pitted faces disappear from windows when visitors pick their way through. Policemen
despair of order or reform, and seek rather to erect barriers protecting the outside world from
the contagion. The clang of the patrol is answered by a kind of spectral silence, and such prisoners
as are taken are never communicative. Visible offences are as varied as the local dialects,
and run the gamut from the smuggling of rum and prohibited aliens through diverse stages of
lawlessness and obscure vice to murder and mutilation in their most abhorrent guises. That these
visible affairs are not more frequent is not to the neighbourhood’s credit, unless the
power of concealment be an art demanding credit. More people enter Red Hook than leave it—or
at least, than leave it by the landward side—and those who are not loquacious are the
likeliest to leave.
Malone found in this state of things a faint stench of secrets more terrible than
any of the sins denounced by citizens and bemoaned by priests and philanthropists. He was
conscious, as one who united imagination with scientific knowledge, that modern people under
lawless conditions tend uncannily to repeat the darkest instinctive patterns of primitive half-ape
savagery in their daily life and ritual observances; and he had often viewed with an
anthropologist’s shudder the chanting, cursing processions of blear-eyed and pockmarked young
men which wound their way along in the dark small hours of morning. One saw groups of these youths
incessantly; sometimes in leering vigils on street corners, sometimes in doorways playing eerily on
cheap instruments of music, sometimes in stupefied dozes or indecent dialogues around cafeteria
tables near Borough Hall, and sometimes in whispering converse around dingy taxicabs drawn up at
the high stoops of crumbling and closely shuttered old houses. They chilled and fascinated him more
than he dared confess to his associates on the force, for he seemed to see in them some monstrous
thread of secret continuity; some fiendish, cryptical, and ancient pattern utterly beyond and
below the sordid mass of facts and habits and haunts listed with such conscientious technical
care by the police. They must be, he felt inwardly, the heirs of some shocking and primordial
tradition; the sharers of debased and broken scraps from cults and ceremonies older than mankind.
Their coherence and definiteness suggested it, and it shewed in the singular suspicion of order
which lurked beneath their squalid disorder. He had not read in vain such treatises as Miss
Murray’s Witch-Cult in Western Europe; and knew that up to recent years there had
certainly survived among peasants and furtive folk a frightful and clandestine system of assemblies
and orgies descended from dark religions antedating the Aryan world, and appearing in popular
legends as Black Masses and Witches’ Sabbaths. That these hellish vestiges of old
Turanian-Asiatic magic and fertility-cults were even now wholly dead he could not for a moment
suppose, and he frequently wondered how much older and how much blacker than the very worst of the
muttered tales some of them might really be.
III.

It was the case of Robert Suydam which took Malone to the heart of things in Red Hook. Suydam
was a lettered recluse of ancient Dutch family, possessed originally of barely independent means,
and inhabiting the spacious but ill-preserved mansion which his grandfather had built in Flatbush
when that village was little more than a pleasant group of colonial cottages surrounding the
steepled and ivy-clad Reformed Church with its iron-railed yard of Netherlandish gravestones.
In his lonely house, set back from Martense Street amidst a yard of venerable trees, Suydam
had read and brooded for some six decades except for a period a generation before, when he had
sailed for the old world and remained there out of sight for eight years. He could afford no
servants, and would admit but few visitors to his absolute solitude; eschewing close friendships
and receiving his rare acquaintances in one of the three ground-floor rooms which he kept in
order—a vast, high-ceiled library whose walls were solidly packed with tattered books
of ponderous, archaic, and vaguely repellent aspect. The growth of the town and its final absorption
in the Brooklyn district had meant nothing to Suydam, and he had come to mean less and less
to the town. Elderly people still pointed him out on the streets, but to most of the recent
population he was merely a queer, corpulent old fellow whose unkempt white hair, stubbly beard,
shiny black clothes, and gold-headed cane earned him an amused glance and nothing more. Malone
did not know him by sight till duty called him to the case, but had heard of him indirectly
as a really profound authority on mediaeval superstition, and had once idly meant to look up
an out-of-print pamphlet of his on the Kabbalah and the Faustus legend, which a friend had quoted
from memory.
Suydam became a “case” when his distant and only relatives sought
court pronouncements on his sanity. Their action seemed sudden to the outside world, but was
really undertaken only after prolonged observation and sorrowful debate. It was based on certain
odd changes in his speech and habits; wild references to impending wonders, and unaccountable
hauntings of disreputable Brooklyn neighbourhoods. He had been growing shabbier and shabbier
with the years, and now prowled about like a veritable mendicant; seen occasionally by humiliated
friends in subway stations, or loitering on the benches around Borough Hall in conversation
with groups of swarthy, evil-looking strangers. When he spoke it was to babble of unlimited
powers almost within his grasp, and to repeat with knowing leers such mystical words or names
as “Sephiroth”, “Ashmodai”, and “Samaël”. The court
action revealed that he was using up his income and wasting his principal in the purchase of
curious tomes imported from London and Paris, and in the maintenance of a squalid basement flat
in the Red Hook district where he spent nearly every night, receiving odd delegations of mixed
rowdies and foreigners, and apparently conducting some kind of ceremonial service behind the
green blinds of secretive windows. Detectives assigned to follow him reported strange cries
and chants and prancing of feet filtering out from these nocturnal rites, and shuddered at their
peculiar ecstasy and abandon despite the commonness of weird orgies in that sodden section.
When, however, the matter came to a hearing, Suydam managed to preserve his liberty. Before
the judge his manner grew urbane and reasonable, and he freely admitted the queerness of demeanour
and extravagant cast of language into which he had fallen through excessive devotion to study
and research. He was, he said, engaged in the investigation of certain details of European tradition
which required the closest contact with foreign groups and their songs and folk dances. The
notion that any low secret society was preying upon him, as hinted by his relatives, was obviously
absurd; and shewed how sadly limited was their understanding of him and his work. Triumphing
with his calm explanations, he was suffered to depart unhindered; and the paid detectives of
the Suydams, Corlears, and Van Brunts were withdrawn in resigned disgust.
It was here that an alliance of Federal inspectors and police, Malone with
them, entered the case. The law had watched the Suydam action with interest, and had in many
instances been called upon to aid the private detectives. In this work it developed that Suydam’s
new associates were among the blackest and most vicious criminals of Red Hook’s devious
lanes, and that at least a third of them were known and repeated offenders in the matter of
thievery, disorder, and the importation of illegal immigrants. Indeed, it would not have been
too much to say that the old scholar’s particular circle coincided almost perfectly with
the worst of the organised cliques which smuggled ashore certain nameless and unclassified Asian
dregs wisely turned back by Ellis Island. In the teeming rookeries of Parker Place—since
renamed—where Suydam had his basement flat, there had grown up a very unusual colony of
unclassified slant-eyed folk who used the Arabic alphabet but were eloquently repudiated by
the great mass of Syrians in and around Atlantic Avenue. They could all have been deported for
lack of credentials, but legalism is slow-moving, and one does not disturb Red Hook unless publicity
forces one to.
These creatures attended a tumbledown stone church, used Wednesdays as a dance-hall,
which reared its Gothic buttresses near the vilest part of the waterfront. It was nominally
Catholic; but priests throughout Brooklyn denied the place all standing and authenticity, and
policemen agreed with them when they listened to the noises it emitted at night. Malone used
to fancy he heard terrible cracked bass notes from a hidden organ far underground when the church
stood empty and unlighted, whilst all observers dreaded the shrieking and drumming which accompanied
the visible services. Suydam, when questioned, said he thought the ritual was some remnant of
Nestorian Christianity tinctured with the Shamanism of Thibet. Most of the people, he conjectured,
were of Mongoloid stock, originating somewhere in or near Kurdistan—and Malone could not
help recalling that Kurdistan is the land of the Yezidis, last survivors of the Persian devil-worshippers.
However this may have been, the stir of the Suydam investigation made it certain that these
unauthorised newcomers were flooding Red Hook in increasing numbers; entering through some marine
conspiracy unreached by revenue officers and harbour police, overrunning Parker Place and rapidly
spreading up the hill, and welcomed with curious fraternalism by the other assorted denizens
of the region. Their squat figures and characteristic squinting physiognomies, grotesquely combined
with flashy American clothing, appeared more and more numerously among the loafers and nomad
gangsters of the Borough Hall section; till at length it was deemed necessary to compute their
numbers, ascertain their sources and occupations, and find if possible a way to round them up
and deliver them to the proper immigration authorities. To this task Malone was assigned by
agreement of Federal and city forces, and as he commenced his canvass of Red Hook he felt poised
upon the brink of nameless terrors, with the shabby, unkempt figure of Robert Suydam as arch-fiend
and adversary.
IV.

Police methods are varied and ingenious. Malone, through unostentatious rambles, carefully casual
conversations, well-timed offers of hip-pocket liquor, and judicious dialogues with frightened
prisoners, learned many isolated facts about the movement whose aspect had become so menacing.
The newcomers were indeed Kurds, but of a dialect obscure and puzzling to exact philology. Such
of them as worked lived mostly as dock-hands and unlicenced pedlars, though frequently serving
in Greek restaurants and tending corner news stands. Most of them, however, had no visible means
of support; and were obviously connected with underworld pursuits, of which smuggling and “bootlegging”
were the least indescribable. They had come in steamships, apparently tramp freighters, and
had been unloaded by stealth on moonless nights in rowboats which stole under a certain wharf
and followed a hidden canal to a secret subterranean pool beneath a house. This wharf, canal,
and house Malone could not locate, for the memories of his informants were exceedingly confused,
while their speech was to a great extent beyond even the ablest interpreters; nor could he gain
any real data on the reasons for their systematic importation. They were reticent about the
exact spot from which they had come, and were never sufficiently off guard to reveal the agencies
which had sought them out and directed their course. Indeed, they developed something like acute
fright when asked the reasons for their presence. Gangsters of other breeds were equally taciturn,
and the most that could be gathered was that some god or great priesthood had promised them
unheard-of powers and supernatural glories and rulerships in a strange land.
The attendance of both newcomers and old gangsters at Suydam’s closely
guarded nocturnal meetings was very regular, and the police soon learned that the erstwhile
recluse had leased additional flats to accommodate such guests as knew his password; at last
occupying three entire houses and permanently harbouring many of his queer companions. He spent
but little time now at his Flatbush home, apparently going and coming only to obtain and return
books; and his face and manner had attained an appalling pitch of wildness. Malone twice interviewed
him, but was each time brusquely repulsed. He knew nothing, he said, of any mysterious plots
or movements; and had no idea how the Kurds could have entered or what they wanted. His business
was to study undisturbed the folklore of all the immigrants of the district; a business with
which policemen had no legitimate concern. Malone mentioned his admiration for Suydam’s
old brochure on the Kabbalah and other myths, but the old man’s softening was only momentary.
He sensed an intrusion, and rebuffed his visitor in no uncertain way; till Malone withdrew disgusted,
and turned to other channels of information.
What Malone would have unearthed could he have worked continuously on the case,
we shall never know. As it was, a stupid conflict between city and Federal authority suspended
the investigations for several months, during which the detective was busy with other assignments.
But at no time did he lose interest, or fail to stand amazed at what began to happen to Robert
Suydam. Just at the time when a wave of kidnappings and disappearances spread its excitement
over New York, the unkempt scholar embarked upon a metamorphosis as startling as it was absurd.
One day he was seen near Borough Hall with clean-shaved face, well-trimmed hair, and tastefully
immaculate attire, and on every day thereafter some obscure improvement was noticed in him.
He maintained his new fastidiousness without interruption, added to it an unwonted sparkle of
eye and crispness of speech, and began little by little to shed the corpulence which had so
long deformed him. Now frequently taken for less than his age, he acquired an elasticity of
step and buoyancy of demeanour to match the new tradition, and shewed a curious darkening of
the hair which somehow did not suggest dye. As the months passed, he commenced to dress less
and less conservatively, and finally astonished his new friends by renovating and redecorating
his Flatbush mansion, which he threw open in a series of receptions, summoning all the acquaintances
he could remember, and extending a special welcome to the fully forgiven relatives who had so
lately sought his restraint. Some attended through curiosity, others through duty; but all were
suddenly charmed by the dawning grace and urbanity of the former hermit. He had, he asserted,
accomplished most of his allotted work; and having just inherited some property from a half-forgotten
European friend, was about to spend his remaining years in a brighter second youth which ease,
care, and diet had made possible to him. Less and less was he seen at Red Hook, and more and
more did he move in the society to which he was born. Policemen noted a tendency of the gangsters
to congregate at the old stone church and dance-hall instead of at the basement flat in Parker
Place, though the latter and its recent annexes still overflowed with noxious life.
Then two incidents occurred—wide enough apart, but both of intense interest
in the case as Malone envisaged it. One was a quiet announcement in the Eagle of Robert
Suydam’s engagement to Miss Cornelia Gerritsen of Bayside, a young woman of excellent
position, and distantly related to the elderly bridegroom-elect; whilst the other was a raid
on the dance-hall church by city police, after a report that the face of a kidnapped child had
been seen for a second at one of the basement windows. Malone had participated in this raid,
and studied the place with much care when inside. Nothing was found—in fact, the building
was entirely deserted when visited—but the sensitive Celt was vaguely disturbed by many
things about the interior. There were crudely painted panels he did not like—panels which
depicted sacred faces with peculiarly worldly and sardonic expressions, and which occasionally
took liberties that even a layman’s sense of decorum could scarcely countenance. Then,
too, he did not relish the Greek inscription on the wall above the pulpit; an ancient incantation
which he had once stumbled upon in Dublin college days, and which read, literally translated,
“O friend and companion of night, thou who rejoicest in the baying of
dogs and spilt blood, who wanderest in the midst of shades among the tombs, who longest for
blood and bringest terror to mortals, Gorgo, Mormo, thousand-faced moon, look favourably on
our sacrifices!”

When he read this he shuddered, and thought vaguely of the cracked bass organ notes he fancied
he had heard beneath the church on certain nights. He shuddered again at the rust around the
rim of a metal basin which stood on the altar, and paused nervously when his nostrils seemed
to detect a curious and ghastly stench from somewhere in the neighbourhood. That organ memory
haunted him, and he explored the basement with particular assiduity before he left. The place
was very hateful to him; yet after all, were the blasphemous panels and inscriptions more than
mere crudities perpetrated by the ignorant?
By the time of Suydam’s wedding the kidnapping epidemic had become a
popular newspaper scandal. Most of the victims were young children of the lowest classes, but
the increasing number of disappearances had worked up a sentiment of the strongest fury. Journals
clamoured for action from the police, and once more the Butler Street station sent its men over
Red Hook for clues, discoveries, and criminals. Malone was glad to be on the trail again, and
took pride in a raid on one of Suydam’s Parker Place houses. There, indeed, no stolen
child was found, despite the tales of screams and the red sash picked up in the areaway; but
the paintings and rough inscriptions on the peeling walls of most of the rooms, and the primitive
chemical laboratory in the attic, all helped to convince the detective that he was on the track
of something tremendous. The paintings were appalling—hideous monsters of every shape
and size, and parodies on human outlines which cannot be described. The writing was in red,
and varied from Arabic to Greek, Roman, and Hebrew letters. Malone could not read much of it,
but what he did decipher was portentous and cabbalistic enough. One frequently repeated motto
was in a sort of Hebraised Hellenistic Greek, and suggested the most terrible daemon-evocations
of the Alexandrian decadence:
“HEL • HELOYM • SOTHER • EMMANVEL • SABAOTH • AGLA
• TETRAGRAMMATON • AGYROS • OTHEOS • ISCHYROS • ATHANATOS • IEHOVA
• VA • ADONAI • SADAY • HOMOVSION • MESSIAS • ESCHEREHEYE.”

Circles and pentagrams loomed on every hand, and told indubitably of the strange beliefs and
aspirations of those who dwelt so squalidly here. In the cellar, however, the strangest thing
was found—a pile of genuine gold ingots covered carelessly with a piece of burlap, and
bearing upon their shining surfaces the same weird hieroglyphics which also adorned the walls.
During the raid the police encountered only a passive resistance from the squinting Orientals
that swarmed from every door. Finding nothing relevant, they had to leave all as it was; but
the precinct captain wrote Suydam a note advising him to look closely to the character of his
tenants and protégés in view of the growing public clamour.
V.

Then came the June wedding and the great sensation. Flatbush was gay for the hour about high
noon, and pennanted motors thronged the streets near the old Dutch church where an awning stretched
from door to highway. No local event ever surpassed the Suydam-Gerritsen nuptials in tone and
scale, and the party which escorted bride and groom to the Cunard Pier was, if not exactly the
smartest, at least a solid page from the Social Register. At five o’clock adieux were
waved, and the ponderous liner edged away from the long pier, slowly turned its nose seaward,
discarded its tug, and headed for the widening water spaces that led to old world wonders. By
night the outer harbour was cleared, and late passengers watched the stars twinkling above an
unpolluted ocean.
Whether the tramp steamer or the scream was first to gain attention, no one
can say. Probably they were simultaneous, but it is of no use to calculate. The scream came
from the Suydam stateroom, and the sailor who broke down the door could perhaps have told frightful
things if he had not forthwith gone completely mad—as it is, he shrieked more loudly than
the first victims, and thereafter ran simpering about the vessel till caught and put in irons.
The ship’s doctor who entered the stateroom and turned on the lights a moment later did
not go mad, but told nobody what he saw till afterward, when he corresponded with Malone in
Chepachet. It was murder—strangulation—but one need not say that the claw-mark on
Mrs. Suydam’s throat could not have come from her husband’s or any other human hand,
or that upon the white wall there flickered for an instant in hateful red a legend which, later
copied from memory, seems to have been nothing less than the fearsome Chaldee letters of the
word “LILITH”. One need not mention these things because they vanished so quickly—as
for Suydam, one could at least bar others from the room until one knew what to think oneself.
The doctor has distinctly assured Malone that he did not see IT. The open porthole, just
before he turned on the lights, was clouded for a second with a certain phosphorescence, and
for a moment there seemed to echo in the night outside the suggestion of a faint and hellish
tittering; but no real outline met the eye. As proof, the doctor points to his continued sanity.
Then the tramp steamer claimed all attention. A boat put off, and a horde of
swart, insolent ruffians in officers’ dress swarmed aboard the temporarily halted Cunarder.
They wanted Suydam or his body—they had known of his trip, and for certain reasons were
sure he would die. The captain’s deck was almost a pandemonium; for at the instant, between
the doctor’s report from the stateroom and the demands of the men from the tramp, not
even the wisest and gravest seaman could think what to do. Suddenly the leader of the visiting
mariners, an Arab with a hatefully negroid mouth, pulled forth a dirty, crumpled paper and handed
it to the captain. It was signed by Robert Suydam, and bore the following odd message:
“In case of sudden or unexplained accident or death on my part, please
deliver me or my body unquestioningly into the hands of the bearer and his associates. Everything,
for me, and perhaps for you, depends on absolute compliance. Explanations can come later—do
not fail me now.
ROBERT SUYDAM.”
Captain and doctor looked at each other, and the latter whispered something
to the former. Finally they nodded rather helplessly and led the way to the Suydam stateroom.
The doctor directed the captain’s glance away as he unlocked the door and admitted the
strange seamen, nor did he breathe easily till they filed out with their burden after an unaccountably
long period of preparation. It was wrapped in bedding from the berths, and the doctor was glad
that the outlines were not very revealing. Somehow the men got the thing over the side and away
to their tramp steamer without uncovering it. The Cunarder started again, and the doctor and
a ship’s undertaker sought out the Suydam stateroom to perform what last services they
could. Once more the physician was forced to reticence and even to mendacity, for a hellish
thing had happened. When the undertaker asked him why he had drained off all of Mrs. Suydam’s
blood, he neglected to affirm that he had not done so; nor did he point to the vacant bottle-spaces
on the rack, or to the odour in the sink which shewed the hasty disposition of the bottles’
original contents. The pockets of those men—if men they were—had bulged damnably
when they left the ship. Two hours later, and the world knew by radio all that it ought to know
of the horrible affair.
VI.

That same June evening, without having heard a word from the sea, Malone was desperately busy
among the alleys of Red Hook. A sudden stir seemed to permeate the place, and as if apprised
by “grapevine telegraph” of something singular, the denizens clustered expectantly
around the dance-hall church and the houses in Parker Place. Three children had just disappeared—blue-eyed
Norwegians from the streets toward Gowanus—and there were rumours of a mob forming among
the sturdy Vikings of that section. Malone had for weeks been urging his colleagues to attempt
a general cleanup; and at last, moved by conditions more obvious to their common sense than
the conjectures of a Dublin dreamer, they had agreed upon a final stroke. The unrest and menace
of this evening had been the deciding factor, and just about midnight a raiding party recruited
from three stations descended upon Parker Place and its environs. Doors were battered in, stragglers
arrested, and candlelighted rooms forced to disgorge unbelievable throngs of mixed foreigners
in figured robes, mitres, and other inexplicable devices. Much was lost in the melee, for objects
were thrown hastily down unexpected shafts, and betraying odours deadened by the sudden kindling
of pungent incense. But spattered blood was everywhere, and Malone shuddered whenever he saw
a brazier or altar from which the smoke was still rising.
He wanted to be in several places at once, and decided on Suydam’s basement
flat only after a messenger had reported the complete emptiness of the dilapidated dance-hall
church. The flat, he thought, must hold some clue to a cult of which the occult scholar had
so obviously become the centre and leader; and it was with real expectancy that he ransacked
the musty rooms, noted their vaguely charnel odour, and examined the curious books, instruments,
gold ingots, and glass-stoppered bottles scattered carelessly here and there. Once a lean, black-and-white
cat edged between his feet and tripped him, overturning at the same time a beaker half full
of a red liquid. The shock was severe, and to this day Malone is not certain of what he saw;
but in dreams he still pictures that cat as it scuttled away with certain monstrous alterations
and peculiarities. Then came the locked cellar door, and the search for something to break it
down. A heavy stool stood near, and its tough seat was more than enough for the antique panels.
A crack formed and enlarged, and the whole door gave way—but from the other side;
whence poured a howling tumult of ice-cold wind with all the stenches of the bottomless pit,
and whence reached a sucking force not of earth or heaven, which, coiling sentiently about the
paralysed detective, dragged him through the aperture and down unmeasured spaces filled with
whispers and wails, and gusts of mocking laughter.
Of course it was a dream. All the specialists have told him so, and he has
nothing to prove the contrary. Indeed, he would rather have it thus; for then the sight of old
brick slums and dark foreign faces would not eat so deeply into his soul. But at the time it
was all horribly real, and nothing can ever efface the memory of those nighted crypts, those
titan arcades, and those half-formed shapes of hell that strode gigantically in silence holding
half-eaten things whose still surviving portions screamed for mercy or laughed with madness.
Odours of incense and corruption joined in sickening concert, and the black air was alive with
the cloudy, semi-visible bulk of shapeless elemental things with eyes. Somewhere dark sticky
water was lapping at onyx piers, and once the shivery tinkle of raucous little bells pealed
out to greet the insane titter of a naked phosphorescent thing which swam into sight, scrambled
ashore, and climbed up to squat leeringly on a carved golden pedestal in the background.
Avenues of limitless night seemed to radiate in every direction, till one might
fancy that here lay the root of a contagion destined to sicken and swallow cities, and engulf
nations in the foetor of hybrid pestilence. Here cosmic sin had entered, and festered by unhallowed
rites had commenced the grinning march of death that was to rot us all to fungous abnormalities
too hideous for the grave’s holding. Satan here held his Babylonish court, and in the
blood of stainless childhood the leprous limbs of phosphorescent Lilith were laved. Incubi and
succubae howled praise to Hecate, and headless moon-calves bleated to the Magna Mater. Goats
leaped to the sound of thin accursed flutes, and aegipans chased endlessly after misshapen fauns
over rocks twisted like swollen toads. Moloch and Ashtaroth were not absent; for in this quintessence
of all damnation the bounds of consciousness were let down, and man’s fancy lay open to
vistas of every realm of horror and every forbidden dimension that evil had power to mould.
The world and Nature were helpless against such assaults from unsealed wells of night, nor could
any sign or prayer check the Walpurgis-riot of horror which had come when a sage with the hateful
key had stumbled on a horde with the locked and brimming coffer of transmitted daemon-lore.
Suddenly a ray of physical light shot through these phantasms, and Malone heard
the sound of oars amidst the blasphemies of things that should be dead. A boat with a lantern
in its prow darted into sight, made fast to an iron ring in the slimy stone pier, and vomited
forth several dark men bearing a long burden swathed in bedding. They took it to the naked phosphorescent
thing on the carved golden pedestal, and the thing tittered and pawed at the bedding. Then they
unswathed it, and propped upright before the pedestal the gangrenous corpse of a corpulent old
man with stubbly beard and unkempt white hair. The phosphorescent thing tittered again, and
the men produced bottles from their pockets and anointed its feet with red, whilst they afterward
gave the bottles to the thing to drink from.
All at once, from an arcaded avenue leading endlessly away, there came the
daemoniac rattle and wheeze of a blasphemous organ, choking and rumbling out the mockeries of
hell in a cracked, sardonic bass. In an instant every moving entity was electrified; and forming
at once into a ceremonial procession, the nightmare horde slithered away in quest of the sound—goat,
satyr, and aegipan, incubus, succuba, and lemur, twisted toad and shapeless elemental, dog-faced
howler and silent strutter in darkness—all led by the abominable naked phosphorescent
thing that had squatted on the carved golden throne, and that now strode insolently bearing
in its arms the glassy-eyed corpse of the corpulent old man. The strange dark men danced in
the rear, and the whole column skipped and leaped with Dionysiac fury. Malone staggered after
them a few steps, delirious and hazy, and doubtful of his place in this or in any world. Then
he turned, faltered, and sank down on the cold damp stone, gasping and shivering as the daemon
organ croaked on, and the howling and drumming and tinkling of the mad procession grew fainter
and fainter.
Vaguely he was conscious of chanted horrors and shocking croakings afar off.
Now and then a wail or whine of ceremonial devotion would float to him through the black arcade,
whilst eventually there rose the dreadful Greek incantation whose text he had read above the
pulpit of that dance-hall church.
“O friend and companion of night, thou who rejoicest in the baying of
dogs (here a hideous howl burst forth) and spilt blood (here nameless sounds vied
with morbid shriekings), who wanderest in the midst of shades among the tombs (here a
whistling sigh occurred), who longest for blood and bringest terror to mortals (short,
sharp cries from myriad throats), Gorgo (repeated as response), Mormo (repeated
with ecstasy), thousand-faced moon (sighs and flute notes), look favourably on our
sacrifices!”
As the chant closed, a general shout went up, and hissing sounds nearly drowned
the croaking of the cracked bass organ. Then a gasp as from many throats, and a babel of barked
and bleated words—“Lilith, Great Lilith, behold the Bridegroom!” More cries,
a clamour of rioting, and the sharp, clicking footfalls of a running figure. The footfalls approached,
and Malone raised himself to his elbow to look.
The luminosity of the crypt, lately diminished, had now slightly increased;
and in that devil-light there appeared the fleeing form of that which should not flee or feel
or breathe—the glassy-eyed, gangrenous corpse of the corpulent old man, now needing no
support, but animated by some infernal sorcery of the rite just closed. After it raced the naked,
tittering, phosphorescent thing that belonged on the carven pedestal, and still farther behind
panted the dark men, and all the dread crew of sentient loathsomenesses. The corpse was gaining
on its pursuers, and seemed bent on a definite object, straining with every rotting muscle toward
the carved golden pedestal, whose necromantic importance was evidently so great. Another moment
and it had reached its goal, whilst the trailing throng laboured on with more frantic speed.
But they were too late, for in one final spurt of strength which ripped tendon from tendon and
sent its noisome bulk floundering to the floor in a state of jellyish dissolution, the staring
corpse which had been Robert Suydam achieved its object and its triumph. The push had been tremendous,
but the force had held out; and as the pusher collapsed to a muddy blotch of corruption the
pedestal he had pushed tottered, tipped, and finally careened from its onyx base into the thick
waters below, sending up a parting gleam of carven gold as it sank heavily to undreamable gulfs
of lower Tartarus. In that instant, too, the whole scene of horror faded to nothingness before
Malone’s eyes; and he fainted amidst a thunderous crash which seemed to blot out all the
evil universe.
VII.

Malone’s dream, experienced in full before he knew of Suydam’s death and transfer
at sea, was curiously supplemented by some odd realities of the case; though that is no reason
why anyone should believe it. The three old houses in Parker Place, doubtless long rotten with
decay in its most insidious form, collapsed without visible cause while half the raiders and
most of the prisoners were inside; and of both the greater number were instantly killed. Only
in the basements and cellars was there much saving of life, and Malone was lucky to have been
deep below the house of Robert Suydam. For he really was there, as no one is disposed to deny.
They found him unconscious by the edge of a night-black pool, with a grotesquely horrible jumble
of decay and bone, identifiable through dental work as the body of Suydam, a few feet away.
The case was plain, for it was hither that the smugglers’ underground canal led; and the
men who took Suydam from the ship had brought him home. They themselves were never found, or
at least never identified; and the ship’s doctor is not yet satisfied with the simple
certitudes of the police.
Suydam was evidently a leader in extensive man-smuggling operations, for the
canal to his house was but one of several subterranean channels and tunnels in the neighbourhood.
There was a tunnel from this house to a crypt beneath the dance-hall church; a crypt accessible
from the church only through a narrow secret passage in the north wall, and in whose chambers
some singular and terrible things were discovered. The croaking organ was there, as well as
a vast arched chapel with wooden benches and a strangely figured altar. The walls were lined
with small cells, in seventeen of which—hideous to relate—solitary prisoners in
a state of complete idiocy were found chained, including four mothers with infants of disturbingly
strange appearance. These infants died soon after exposure to the light; a circumstance which
the doctors thought rather merciful. Nobody but Malone, among those who inspected them, remembered
the sombre question of old Delrio: “An sint unquam daemones incubi et succubae, et
an ex tali congressu proles nasci queat?”
Before the canals were filled up they were thoroughly dredged, and yielded
forth a sensational array of sawed and split bones of all sizes. The kidnapping epidemic, very
clearly, had been traced home; though only two of the surviving prisoners could by any legal
thread be connected with it. These men are now in prison, since they failed of conviction as
accessories in the actual murders. The carved golden pedestal or throne so often mentioned by
Malone as of primary occult importance was never brought to light, though at one place under
the Suydam house the canal was observed to sink into a well too deep for dredging. It was choked
up at the mouth and cemented over when the cellars of the new houses were made, but Malone often
speculates on what lies beneath. The police, satisfied that they had shattered a dangerous gang
of maniacs and man-smugglers, turned over to the Federal authorities the unconvicted Kurds,
who before their deportation were conclusively found to belong to the Yezidi clan of devil-worshippers.
The tramp ship and its crew remain an elusive mystery, though cynical detectives are once more
ready to combat its smuggling and rum-running ventures. Malone thinks these detectives shew
a sadly limited perspective in their lack of wonder at the myriad unexplainable details, and
the suggestive obscurity of the whole case; though he is just as critical of the newspapers,
which saw only a morbid sensation and gloated over a minor sadist cult which they might have
proclaimed a horror from the universe’s very heart. But he is content to rest silent in
Chepachet, calming his nervous system and praying that time may gradually transfer his terrible
experience from the realm of present reality to that of picturesque and semi-mythical remoteness.
Robert Suydam sleeps beside his bride in Greenwood Cemetery. No funeral was
held over the strangely released bones, and relatives are grateful for the swift oblivion which
overtook the case as a whole. The scholar’s connexion with the Red Hook horrors, indeed,
was never emblazoned by legal proof; since his death forestalled the inquiry he would otherwise
have faced. His own end is not much mentioned, and the Suydams hope that posterity may recall
him only as a gentle recluse who dabbled in harmless magic and folklore.
As for Red Hook—it is always the same. Suydam came and went; a terror
gathered and faded; but the evil spirit of darkness and squalor broods on amongst the mongrels
in the old brick houses, and prowling bands still parade on unknown errands past windows where
lights and twisted faces unaccountably appear and disappear. Age-old horror is a hydra with
a thousand heads, and the cults of darkness are rooted in blasphemies deeper than the well of
Democritus. The soul of the beast is omnipresent and triumphant, and Red Hook’s legions
of blear-eyed, pockmarked youths still chant and curse and howl as they file from abyss to abyss,
none knows whence or whither, pushed on by blind laws of biology which they may never understand.
As of old, more people enter Red Hook than leave it on the landward side, and there are already
rumours of new canals running underground to certain centres of traffic in liquor and less mentionable
things.
The dance-hall church is now mostly a dance-hall, and queer faces have appeared
at night at the windows. Lately a policeman expressed the belief that the filled-up crypt has
been dug out again, and for no simply explainable purpose. Who are we to combat poisons older
than history and mankind? Apes danced in Asia to those horrors, and the cancer lurks secure
and spreading where furtiveness hides in rows of decaying brick.
Malone does not shudder without cause—for only the other day an officer
overheard a swarthy squinting hag teaching a small child some whispered patois in the shadow
of an areaway. He listened, and thought it very strange when he heard her repeat over and over
again,
“O friend and companion of night, thou who rejoicest in the baying of
dogs and spilt blood, who wanderest in the midst of shades among the tombs, who longest for
blood and bringest terror to mortals, Gorgo, Mormo, thousand-faced moon, look favourably on
our sacrifices!”


The Lurking Fear

I. The Shadow on the Chimney

There was thunder in the air on the night I went to the deserted mansion atop Tempest Mountain
to find the lurking fear. I was not alone, for foolhardiness was not then mixed with that love
of the grotesque and the terrible which has made my career a series of quests for strange horrors
in literature and in life. With me were two faithful and muscular men for whom I had sent when
the time came; men long associated with me in my ghastly explorations because of their peculiar
fitness.
We had started quietly from the village because of the reporters who still
lingered about after the eldritch panic of a month before—the nightmare creeping death.
Later, I thought, they might aid me; but I did not want them then. Would to God I had let them
share the search, that I might not have had to bear the secret alone so long; to bear it alone
for fear the world would call me mad or go mad itself at the daemon implications of the thing.
Now that I am telling it anyway, lest the brooding make me a maniac, I wish I had never concealed
it. For I, and I only, know what manner of fear lurked on that spectral and desolate mountain.
In a small motor-car we covered the miles of primeval forest and hill until
the wooded ascent checked it. The country bore an aspect more than usually sinister as we viewed
it by night and without the accustomed crowds of investigators, so that we were often tempted
to use the acetylene headlight despite the attention it might attract. It was not a wholesome
landscape after dark, and I believe I would have noticed its morbidity even had I been ignorant
of the terror that stalked there. Of wild creatures there were none—they are wise when
death leers close. The ancient lightning-scarred trees seemed unnaturally large and twisted,
and the other vegetation unnaturally thick and feverish, while curious mounds and hummocks in
the weedy, fulgurite-pitted earth reminded me of snakes and dead men’s skulls swelled
to gigantic proportions.
Fear had lurked on Tempest Mountain for more than a century. This I learned
at once from newspaper accounts of the catastrophe which first brought the region to the world’s
notice. The place is a remote, lonely elevation in that part of the Catskills where Dutch civilisation
once feebly and transiently penetrated, leaving behind as it receded only a few ruined mansions
and a degenerate squatter population inhabiting pitiful hamlets on isolated slopes. Normal beings
seldom visited the locality till the state police were formed, and even now only infrequent
troopers patrol it. The fear, however, is an old tradition throughout the neighbouring villages;
since it is a prime topic in the simple discourse of the poor mongrels who sometimes leave their
valleys to trade hand-woven baskets for such primitive necessities as they cannot shoot, raise,
or make.
The lurking fear dwelt in the shunned and deserted Martense mansion, which
crowned the high but gradual eminence whose liability to frequent thunderstorms gave it the
name of Tempest Mountain. For over a hundred years the antique, grove-circled stone house had
been the subject of stories incredibly wild and monstrously hideous; stories of a silent colossal
creeping death which stalked abroad in summer. With whimpering insistence the squatters told
tales of a daemon which seized lone wayfarers after dark, either carrying them off or leaving
them in a frightful state of gnawed dismemberment; while sometimes they whispered of blood-trails
toward the distant mansion. Some said the thunder called the lurking fear out of its habitation,
while others said the thunder was its voice.
No one outside the backwoods had believed these varying and conflicting stories,
with their incoherent, extravagant descriptions of the half-glimpsed fiend; yet not a farmer
or villager doubted that the Martense mansion was ghoulishly haunted. Local history forbade
such a doubt, although no ghostly evidence was ever found by such investigators as had visited
the building after some especially vivid tale of the squatters. Grandmothers told strange myths
of the Martense spectre; myths concerning the Martense family itself, its queer hereditary dissimilarity
of eyes, its long, unnatural annals, and the murder which had cursed it.
The terror which brought me to the scene was a sudden and portentous confirmation
of the mountaineers’ wildest legends. One summer night, after a thunderstorm of unprecedented
violence, the countryside was aroused by a squatter stampede which no mere delusion could create.
The pitiful throngs of natives shrieked and whined of the unnamable horror which had descended
upon them, and they were not doubted. They had not seen it, but had heard such cries from one
of their hamlets that they knew a creeping death had come.
In the morning citizens and state troopers followed the shuddering mountaineers
to the place where they said the death had come. Death was indeed there. The ground under one
of the squatters’ villages had caved in after a lightning stroke, destroying several of
the malodorous shanties; but upon this property damage was superimposed an organic devastation
which paled it to insignificance. Of a possible 75 natives who had inhabited this spot, not
one living specimen was visible. The disordered earth was covered with blood and human debris
bespeaking too vividly the ravages of daemon teeth and talons; yet no visible trail led away
from the carnage. That some hideous animal must be the cause, everyone quickly agreed; nor did
any tongue now revive the charge that such cryptic deaths formed merely the sordid murders common
in decadent communities. That charge was revived only when about 25 of the estimated population
were found missing from the dead; and even then it was hard to explain the murder of fifty by
half that number. But the fact remained that on a summer night a bolt had come out of the heavens
and left a dead village whose corpses were horribly mangled, chewed, and clawed.
The excited countryside immediately connected the horror with the haunted Martense
mansion, though the localities were over three miles apart. The troopers were more sceptical;
including the mansion only casually in their investigations, and dropping it altogether when
they found it thoroughly deserted. Country and village people, however, canvassed the place
with infinite care; overturning everything in the house, sounding ponds and brooks, beating
down bushes, and ransacking the nearby forests. All was in vain; the death that had come had
left no trace save destruction itself.
By the second day of the search the affair was fully treated by the newspapers,
whose reporters overran Tempest Mountain. They described it in much detail, and with many interviews
to elucidate the horror’s history as told by local grandams. I followed the accounts languidly
at first, for I am a connoisseur in horrors; but after a week I detected an atmosphere which
stirred me oddly, so that on August 5th, 1921, I registered among the reporters who crowded
the hotel at Lefferts Corners, nearest village to Tempest Mountain and acknowledged headquarters
of the searchers. Three weeks more, and the dispersal of the reporters left me free to begin
a terrible exploration based on the minute inquiries and surveying with which I had meanwhile
busied myself.
So on this summer night, while distant thunder rumbled, I left a silent motor-car
and tramped with two armed companions up the last mound-covered reaches of Tempest Mountain,
casting the beams of an electric torch on the spectral grey walls that began to appear through
giant oaks ahead. In this morbid night solitude and feeble shifting illumination, the vast box-like
pile displayed obscure hints of terror which day could not uncover; yet I did not hesitate,
since I had come with fierce resolution to test an idea. I believed that the thunder called
the death-daemon out of some fearsome secret place; and be that daemon solid entity or vaporous
pestilence, I meant to see it.
I had thoroughly searched the ruin before, hence knew my plan well; choosing
as the seat of my vigil the old room of Jan Martense, whose murder looms so great in the rural
legends. I felt subtly that the apartment of this ancient victim was best for my purposes. The
chamber, measuring about twenty feet square, contained like the other rooms some rubbish which
had once been furniture. It lay on the second story, on the southeast corner of the house, and
had an immense east window and narrow south window, both devoid of panes or shutters. Opposite
the large window was an enormous Dutch fireplace with scriptural tiles representing the prodigal
son, and opposite the narrow window was a spacious bed built into the wall.
As the tree-muffled thunder grew louder, I arranged my plan’s details.
First I fastened side by side to the ledge of the large window three rope ladders which I had
brought with me. I knew they reached a suitable spot on the grass outside, for I had tested
them. Then the three of us dragged from another room a wide four-poster bedstead, crowding it
laterally against the window. Having strown it with fir boughs, all now rested on it with drawn
automatics, two relaxing while the third watched. From whatever direction the daemon might come,
our potential escape was provided. If it came from within the house, we had the window ladders;
if from outside, the door and the stairs. We did not think, judging from precedent, that it
would pursue us far even at worst.
I watched from midnight to one o’clock, when in spite of the sinister
house, the unprotected window, and the approaching thunder and lightning, I felt singularly
drowsy. I was between my two companions, George Bennett being toward the window and William
Tobey toward the fireplace. Bennett was asleep, having apparently felt the same anomalous drowsiness
which affected me, so I designated Tobey for the next watch although even he was nodding. It
is curious how intently I had been watching that fireplace.
The increasing thunder must have affected my dreams, for in the brief time
I slept there came to me apocalyptic visions. Once I partly awaked, probably because the sleeper
toward the window had restlessly flung an arm across my chest. I was not sufficiently awake
to see whether Tobey was attending to his duties as sentinel, but felt a distinct anxiety on
that score. Never before had the presence of evil so poignantly oppressed me. Later I must have
dropped asleep again, for it was out of a phantasmal chaos that my mind leaped when the night
grew hideous with shrieks beyond anything in my former experience or imagination.
In that shrieking the inmost soul of human fear and agony clawed hopelessly
and insanely at the ebony gates of oblivion. I awoke to red madness and the mockery of diabolism,
as farther and farther down inconceivable vistas that phobic and crystalline anguish retreated
and reverberated. There was no light, but I knew from the empty space at my right that Tobey
was gone, God alone knew whither. Across my chest still lay the heavy arm of the sleeper at
my left.
Then came the devastating stroke of lightning which shook the whole mountain,
lit the darkest crypts of the hoary grove, and splintered the patriarch of the twisted trees.
In the daemon flash of a monstrous fireball the sleeper started up suddenly while the glare
from beyond the window threw his shadow vividly upon the chimney above the fireplace from which
my eyes had never strayed. That I am still alive and sane, is a marvel I cannot fathom. I cannot
fathom it, for the shadow on that chimney was not that of George Bennett or of any other human
creature, but a blasphemous abnormality from hell’s nethermost craters; a nameless, shapeless
abomination which no mind could fully grasp and no pen even partly describe. In another second
I was alone in the accursed mansion, shivering and gibbering. George Bennett and William Tobey
had left no trace, not even of a struggle. They were never heard of again.
II. A Passer in the Storm

For days after that hideous experience in the forest-swathed mansion I lay nervously exhausted
in my hotel room at Lefferts Corners. I do not remember exactly how I managed to reach the motor-car,
start it, and slip unobserved back to the village; for I retain no distinct impression save
of wild-armed titan trees, daemoniac mutterings of thunder, and Charonian shadows athwart the
low mounds that dotted and streaked the region.
As I shivered and brooded on the casting of that brain-blasting shadow, I knew
that I had at last pried out one of earth’s supreme horrors—one of those nameless
blights of outer voids whose faint daemon scratchings we sometimes hear on the farthest rim
of space, yet from which our own finite vision has given us a merciful immunity. The shadow
I had seen, I hardly dared to analyse or identify. Something had lain between me and the window
that night, but I shuddered whenever I could not cast off the instinct to classify it. If it
had only snarled, or bayed, or laughed titteringly—even that would have relieved the abysmal
hideousness. But it was so silent. It had rested a heavy arm or fore leg on my chest. . . .
Obviously it was organic, or had once been organic. . . . Jan Martense, whose
room I had invaded, was buried in the graveyard near the mansion. . . . I must
find Bennett and Tobey, if they lived . . . why had it picked them, and left
me for the last? . . . Drowsiness is so stifling, and dreams are so horrible. . . .
In a short time I realised that I must tell my story to someone or break down
completely. I had already decided not to abandon the quest for the lurking fear, for in my rash
ignorance it seemed to me that uncertainty was worse than enlightenment, however terrible the
latter might prove to be. Accordingly I resolved in my mind the best course to pursue; whom
to select for my confidences, and how to track down the thing which had obliterated two men
and cast a nightmare shadow.
My chief acquaintances at Lefferts Corners had been the affable reporters,
of whom several still remained to collect final echoes of the tragedy. It was from these that
I determined to choose a colleague, and the more I reflected the more my preference inclined
toward one Arthur Munroe, a dark, lean man of about thirty-five, whose education, taste, intelligence,
and temperament all seemed to mark him as one not bound to conventional ideas and experiences.
On an afternoon in early September Arthur Munroe listened to my story. I saw
from the beginning that he was both interested and sympathetic, and when I had finished he analysed
and discussed the thing with the greatest shrewdness and judgment. His advice, moreover, was
eminently practical; for he recommended a postponement of operations at the Martense mansion
until we might become fortified with more detailed historical and geographical data. On his
initiative we combed the countryside for information regarding the terrible Martense family,
and discovered a man who possessed a marvellously illuminating ancestral diary. We also talked
at length with such of the mountain mongrels as had not fled from the terror and confusion to
remoter slopes, and arranged to precede our culminating task—the exhaustive and definitive
examination of the mansion in the light of its detailed history—with an equally exhaustive
and definitive examination of spots associated with the various tragedies of squatter legend.
The results of this examination were not at first very enlightening, though
our tabulation of them seemed to reveal a fairly significant trend; namely, that the number
of reported horrors was by far the greatest in areas either comparatively near the avoided house
or connected with it by stretches of the morbidly overnourished forest. There were, it is true,
exceptions; indeed, the horror which had caught the world’s ear had happened in a treeless
space remote alike from the mansion and from any connecting woods.
As to the nature and appearance of the lurking fear, nothing could be gained
from the scared and witless shanty-dwellers. In the same breath they called it a snake and a
giant, a thunder-devil and a bat, a vulture and a walking tree. We did, however, deem ourselves
justified in assuming that it was a living organism highly susceptible to electrical storms;
and although certain of the stories suggested wings, we believed that its aversion for open
spaces made land locomotion a more probable theory. The only thing really incompatible with
the latter view was the rapidity with which the creature must have travelled in order to perform
all the deeds attributed to it.
When we came to know the squatters better, we found them curiously likeable
in many ways. Simple animals they were, gently descending the evolutionary scale because of
their unfortunate ancestry and stultifying isolation. They feared outsiders, but slowly grew
accustomed to us; finally helping vastly when we beat down all the thickets and tore out all
the partitions of the mansion in our search for the lurking fear. When we asked them to help
us find Bennett and Tobey they were truly distressed; for they wanted to help us, yet knew that
these victims had gone as wholly out of the world as their own missing people. That great numbers
of them had actually been killed and removed, just as the wild animals had long been exterminated,
we were of course thoroughly convinced; and we waited apprehensively for further tragedies to
occur.
By the middle of October we were puzzled by our lack of progress. Owing to
the clear nights no daemoniac aggressions had taken place, and the completeness of our vain
searches of house and country almost drove us to regard the lurking fear as a non-material agency.
We feared that the cold weather would come on and halt our explorations, for all agreed that
the daemon was generally quiet in winter. Thus there was a kind of haste and desperation in
our last daylight canvass of the horror-visited hamlet; a hamlet now deserted because of the
squatters’ fears.
The ill-fated squatter hamlet had borne no name, but had long stood in a sheltered
though treeless cleft between two elevations called respectively Cone Mountain and Maple Hill.
It was closer to Maple Hill than to Cone Mountain, some of the crude abodes indeed being dugouts
on the side of the former eminence. Geographically it lay about two miles northwest of the base
of Tempest Mountain, and three miles from the oak-girt mansion. Of the distance between the
hamlet and the mansion, fully two miles and a quarter on the hamlet’s side was entirely
open country; the plain being of fairly level character save for some of the low snake-like
mounds, and having as vegetation only grass and scattered weeds. Considering this topography,
we had finally concluded that the daemon must have come by way of Cone Mountain, a wooded southern
prolongation of which ran to within a short distance of the westernmost spur of Tempest Mountain.
The upheaval of ground we traced conclusively to a landslide from Maple Hill, a tall lone splintered
tree on whose side had been the striking point of the thunderbolt which summoned the fiend.
As for the twentieth time or more Arthur Munroe and I went minutely over every
inch of the violated village, we were filled with a certain discouragement coupled with vague
and novel fears. It was acutely uncanny, even when frightful and uncanny things were common,
to encounter so blankly clueless a scene after such overwhelming occurrences; and we moved about
beneath the leaden, darkening sky with that tragic directionless zeal which results from a combined
sense of futility and necessity of action. Our care was gravely minute; every cottage was again
entered, every hillside dugout again searched for bodies, every thorny foot of adjacent slope
again scanned for dens and caves, but all without result. And yet, as I have said, vague new
fears hovered menacingly over us; as if giant bat-winged gryphons squatted invisibly on the
mountain-tops and leered with Abaddon-eyes that had looked on trans-cosmic gulfs.
As the afternoon advanced, it became increasingly difficult to see; and we
heard the rumble of a thunderstorm gathering over Tempest Mountain. This sound in such a locality
naturally stirred us, though less than it would have done at night. As it was, we hoped desperately
that the storm would last until well after dark; and with that hope turned from our aimless
hillside searching toward the nearest inhabited hamlet to gather a body of squatters as helpers
in the investigation. Timid as they were, a few of the younger men were sufficiently inspired
by our protective leadership to promise such help.
We had hardly more than turned, however, when there descended such a blinding
sheet of torrential rain that shelter became imperative. The extreme, almost nocturnal darkness
of the sky caused us to stumble sadly, but guided by the frequent flashes of lightning and by
our minute knowledge of the hamlet we soon reached the least porous cabin of the lot; an heterogeneous
combination of logs and boards whose still existing door and single tiny window both faced Maple
Hill. Barring the door after us against the fury of the wind and rain, we put in place the crude
window shutter which our frequent searches had taught us where to find. It was dismal sitting
there on rickety boxes in the pitchy darkness, but we smoked pipes and occasionally flashed
our pocket lamps about. Now and then we could see the lightning through the cracks in the wall;
the afternoon was so incredibly dark that each flash was extremely vivid.
The stormy vigil reminded me shudderingly of my ghastly night on Tempest Mountain.
My mind turned to that odd question which had kept recurring ever since the nightmare thing
had happened; and again I wondered why the daemon, approaching the three watchers either from
the window or the interior, had begun with the men on each side and left the middle man till
the last, when the titan fireball had scared it away. Why had it not taken its victims in natural
order, with myself second, from whichever direction it had approached? With what manner of far-reaching
tentacles did it prey? Or did it know that I was the leader, and save me for a fate worse than
that of my companions?
In the midst of these reflections, as if dramatically arranged to intensify
them, there fell near by a terrific bolt of lightning followed by the sound of sliding earth.
At the same time the wolfish wind rose to daemoniac crescendoes of ululation. We were sure that
the lone tree on Maple Hill had been struck again, and Munroe rose from his box and went to
the tiny window to ascertain the damage. When he took down the shutter the wind and rain howled
deafeningly in, so that I could not hear what he said; but I waited while he leaned out and
tried to fathom Nature’s pandemonium.
Gradually a calming of the wind and dispersal of the unusual darkness told
of the storm’s passing. I had hoped it would last into the night to help our quest, but
a furtive sunbeam from a knothole behind me removed the likelihood of such a thing. Suggesting
to Munroe that we had better get some light even if more showers came, I unbarred and opened
the crude door. The ground outside was a singular mass of mud and pools, with fresh heaps of
earth from the slight landslide; but I saw nothing to justify the interest which kept my companion
silently leaning out the window. Crossing to where he leaned, I touched his shoulder; but he
did not move. Then, as I playfully shook him and turned him around, I felt the strangling tendrils
of a cancerous horror whose roots reached into illimitable pasts and fathomless abysms of the
night that broods beyond time.
For Arthur Munroe was dead. And on what remained of his chewed and gouged head
there was no longer a face.
III. What the Red Glare Meant

On the tempest-racked night of November 8, 1921, with a lantern which cast charnel shadows,
I stood digging alone and idiotically in the grave of Jan Martense. I had begun to dig in the
afternoon, because a thunderstorm was brewing, and now that it was dark and the storm had burst
above the maniacally thick foliage I was glad.
I believe that my mind was partly unhinged by events since August 5th; the
daemon shadow in the mansion, the general strain and disappointment, and the thing that occurred
at the hamlet in an October storm. After that thing I had dug a grave for one whose death I
could not understand. I knew that others could not understand either, so let them think Arthur
Munroe had wandered away. They searched, but found nothing. The squatters might have understood,
but I dared not frighten them more. I myself seemed strangely callous. That shock at the mansion
had done something to my brain, and I could think only of the quest for a horror now grown to
cataclysmic stature in my imagination; a quest which the fate of Arthur Munroe made me vow to
keep silent and solitary.
The scene of my excavations would alone have been enough to unnerve any ordinary
man. Baleful primal trees of unholy size, age, and grotesqueness leered above me like the pillars
of some hellish Druidic temple; muffling the thunder, hushing the clawing wind, and admitting
but little rain. Beyond the scarred trunks in the background, illumined by faint flashes of
filtered lightning, rose the damp ivied stones of the deserted mansion, while somewhat nearer
was the abandoned Dutch garden whose walks and beds were polluted by a white, fungous, foetid,
overnourished vegetation that never saw full daylight. And nearest of all was the graveyard,
where deformed trees tossed insane branches as their roots displaced unhallowed slabs and sucked
venom from what lay below. Now and then, beneath the brown pall of leaves that rotted and festered
in the antediluvian forest darkness, I could trace the sinister outlines of some of those low
mounds which characterised the lightning-pierced region.
History had led me to this archaic grave. History, indeed, was all I had after
everything else ended in mocking Satanism. I now believed that the lurking fear was no material
thing, but a wolf-fanged ghost that rode the midnight lightning. And I believed, because of
the masses of local tradition I had unearthed in my search with Arthur Munroe, that the ghost
was that of Jan Martense, who died in 1762. That is why I was digging idiotically in his grave.
The Martense mansion was built in 1670 by Gerrit Martense, a wealthy New-Amsterdam
merchant who disliked the changing order under British rule, and had constructed this magnificent
domicile on a remote woodland summit whose untrodden solitude and unusual scenery pleased him.
The only substantial disappointment encountered in this site was that which concerned the prevalence
of violent thunderstorms in summer. When selecting the hill and building his mansion, Mynheer
Martense had laid these frequent natural outbursts to some peculiarity of the year; but in time
he perceived that the locality was especially liable to such phenomena. At length, having found
these storms injurious to his health, he fitted up a cellar into which he could retreat from
their wildest pandemonium.
Of Gerrit Martense’s descendants less is known than of himself; since
they were all reared in hatred of the English civilisation, and trained to shun such of the
colonists as accepted it. Their life was exceedingly secluded, and people declared that their
isolation had made them heavy of speech and comprehension. In appearance all were marked by
a peculiar inherited dissimilarity of eyes; one generally being blue and the other brown. Their
social contacts grew fewer and fewer, till at last they took to intermarrying with the numerous
menial class about the estate. Many of the crowded family degenerated, moved across the valley,
and merged with the mongrel population which was later to produce the pitiful squatters. The
rest had stuck sullenly to their ancestral mansion, becoming more and more clannish and taciturn,
yet developing a nervous responsiveness to the frequent thunderstorms.
Most of this information reached the outside world through young Jan Martense,
who from some kind of restlessness joined the colonial army when news of the Albany Convention
reached Tempest Mountain. He was the first of Gerrit’s descendants to see much of the
world; and when he returned in 1760 after six years of campaigning, he was hated as an outsider
by his father, uncles, and brothers, in spite of his dissimilar Martense eyes. No longer could
he share the peculiarities and prejudices of the Martenses, while the very mountain thunderstorms
failed to intoxicate him as they had before. Instead, his surroundings depressed him; and he
frequently wrote to a friend in Albany of plans to leave the paternal roof.
In the spring of 1763 Jonathan Gifford, the Albany friend of Jan Martense,
became worried by his correspondent’s silence; especially in view of the conditions and
quarrels at the Martense mansion. Determined to visit Jan in person, he went into the mountains
on horseback. His diary states that he reached Tempest Mountain on September 20, finding the
mansion in great decrepitude. The sullen, odd-eyed Martenses, whose unclean animal aspect shocked
him, told him in broken gutturals that Jan was dead. He had, they insisted, been struck by lightning
the autumn before; and now lay buried behind the neglected sunken gardens. They shewed the visitor
the grave, barren and devoid of markers. Something in the Martenses’ manner gave Gifford
a feeling of repulsion and suspicion, and a week later he returned with spade and mattock to
explore the sepulchral spot. He found what he expected—a skull crushed cruelly as if by
savage blows—so returning to Albany he openly charged the Martenses with the murder of
their kinsman.
Legal evidence was lacking, but the story spread rapidly round the countryside;
and from that time the Martenses were ostracised by the world. No one would deal with them,
and their distant manor was shunned as an accursed place. Somehow they managed to live on independently
by the products of their estate, for occasional lights glimpsed from far-away hills attested
their continued presence. These lights were seen as late as 1810, but toward the last they became
very infrequent.
Meanwhile there grew up about the mansion and the mountain a body of diabolic
legendry. The place was avoided with doubled assiduousness, and invested with every whispered
myth tradition could supply. It remained unvisited till 1816, when the continued absence of
lights was noticed by the squatters. At that time a party made investigations, finding the house
deserted and partly in ruins.
There were no skeletons about, so that departure rather than death was inferred.
The clan seemed to have left several years before, and improvised penthouses shewed how numerous
it had grown prior to its migration. Its cultural level had fallen very low, as proved by decaying
furniture and scattered silverware which must have been long abandoned when its owners left.
But though the dreaded Martenses were gone, the fear of the haunted house continued; and grew
very acute when new and strange stories arose among the mountain decadents. There it stood;
deserted, feared, and linked with the vengeful ghost of Jan Martense. There it still stood on
the night I dug in Jan Martense’s grave.
I have described my protracted digging as idiotic, and such it indeed was in
object and method. The coffin of Jan Martense had soon been unearthed—it now held only
dust and nitre—but in my fury to exhume his ghost I delved irrationally and clumsily down
beneath where he had lain. God knows what I expected to find—I only felt that I was digging
in the grave of a man whose ghost stalked by night.
It is impossible to say what monstrous depth I had attained when my spade,
and soon my feet, broke through the ground beneath. The event, under the circumstances, was
tremendous; for in the existence of a subterranean space here, my mad theories had terrible
confirmation. My slight fall had extinguished the lantern, but I produced an electric pocket
lamp and viewed the small horizontal tunnel which led away indefinitely in both directions.
It was amply large enough for a man to wriggle through; and though no sane person would have
tried it at that time, I forgot danger, reason, and cleanliness in my single-minded fever to
unearth the lurking fear. Choosing the direction toward the house, I scrambled recklessly into
the narrow burrow; squirming ahead blindly and rapidly, and flashing but seldom the lamp I kept
before me.
What language can describe the spectacle of a man lost in infinitely abysmal
earth; pawing, twisting, wheezing; scrambling madly through sunken convolutions of immemorial
blackness without an idea of time, safety, direction, or definite object? There is something
hideous in it, but that is what I did. I did it for so long that life faded to a far memory,
and I became one with the moles and grubs of nighted depths. Indeed, it was only by accident
that after interminable writhings I jarred my forgotten electric lamp alight, so that it shone
eerily along the burrow of caked loam that stretched and curved ahead.
I had been scrambling in this way for some time, so that my battery had burned
very low, when the passage suddenly inclined sharply upward, altering my mode of progress. And
as I raised my glance it was without preparation that I saw glistening in the distance two daemoniac
reflections of my expiring lamp; two reflections glowing with a baneful and unmistakable effulgence,
and provoking maddeningly nebulous memories. I stopped automatically, though lacking the brain
to retreat. The eyes approached, yet of the thing that bore them I could distinguish only a
claw. But what a claw! Then far overhead I heard a faint crashing which I recognised. It was
the wild thunder of the mountain, raised to hysteric fury—I must have been crawling upward
for some time, so that the surface was now quite near. And as the muffled thunder clattered,
those eyes still stared with vacuous viciousness.
Thank God I did not then know what it was, else I should have died. But I was
saved by the very thunder that had summoned it, for after a hideous wait there burst from the
unseen outside sky one of those frequent mountainward bolts whose aftermath I had noticed here
and there as gashes of disturbed earth and fulgurites of various sizes. With Cyclopean rage
it tore through the soil above that damnable pit, blinding and deafening me, yet not wholly
reducing me to a coma.
In the chaos of sliding, shifting earth I clawed and floundered helplessly
till the rain on my head steadied me and I saw that I had come to the surface in a familiar
spot; a steep unforested place on the southwest slope of the mountain. Recurrent sheet lightnings
illumed the tumbled ground and the remains of the curious low hummock which had stretched down
from the wooded higher slope, but there was nothing in the chaos to shew my place of egress
from the lethal catacomb. My brain was as great a chaos as the earth, and as a distant red glare
burst on the landscape from the south I hardly realised the horror I had been through.
But when two days later the squatters told me what the red glare meant, I felt
more horror than that which the mould-burrow and the claw and eyes had given; more horror because
of the overwhelming implications. In a hamlet twenty miles away an orgy of fear had followed
the bolt which brought me above ground, and a nameless thing had dropped from an overhanging
tree into a weak-roofed cabin. It had done a deed, but the squatters had fired the cabin in
frenzy before it could escape. It had been doing that deed at the very moment the earth caved
in on the thing with the claw and eyes.
IV. The Horror in the Eyes

There can be nothing normal in the mind of one who, knowing what I knew of the horrors of Tempest
Mountain, would seek alone for the fear that lurked there. That at least two of the fear’s
embodiments were destroyed, formed but a slight guarantee of mental and physical safety in this
Acheron of multiform diabolism; yet I continued my quest with even greater zeal as events and
revelations became more monstrous.
When, two days after my frightful crawl through that crypt of the eyes and
claw, I learned that a thing had malignly hovered twenty miles away at the same instant the
eyes were glaring at me, I experienced virtual convulsions of fright. But that fright was so
mixed with wonder and alluring grotesqueness, that it was almost a pleasant sensation. Sometimes,
in the throes of a nightmare when unseen powers whirl one over the roofs of strange dead cities
toward the grinning chasm of Nis, it is a relief and even a delight to shriek wildly and throw
oneself voluntarily along with the hideous vortex of dream-doom into whatever bottomless gulf
may yawn. And so it was with the waking nightmare of Tempest Mountain; the discovery that two
monsters had haunted the spot gave me ultimately a mad craving to plunge into the very earth
of the accursed region, and with bare hands dig out the death that leered from every inch of
the poisonous soil.
As soon as possible I visited the grave of Jan Martense and dug vainly where
I had dug before. Some extensive cave-in had obliterated all trace of the underground passage,
while the rain had washed so much earth back into the excavation that I could not tell how deeply
I had dug that other day. I likewise made a difficult trip to the distant hamlet where the death-creature
had been burnt, and was little repaid for my trouble. In the ashes of the fateful cabin I found
several bones, but apparently none of the monster’s. The squatters said the thing had
had only one victim; but in this I judged them inaccurate, since besides the complete skull
of a human being, there was another bony fragment which seemed certainly to have belonged to
a human skull at some time. Though the rapid drop of the monster had been seen, no one could
say just what the creature was like; those who had glimpsed it called it simply a devil. Examining
the great tree where it had lurked, I could discern no distinctive marks. I tried to find some
trail into the black forest, but on this occasion could not stand the sight of those morbidly
large boles, or of those vast serpent-like roots that twisted so malevolently before they sank
into the earth.
My next step was to re-examine with microscopic care the deserted hamlet where
death had come most abundantly, and where Arthur Munroe had seen something he never lived to
describe. Though my vain previous searches had been exceedingly minute, I now had new data to
test; for my horrible grave-crawl convinced me that at least one of the phases of the monstrosity
had been an underground creature. This time, on the fourteenth of November, my quest concerned
itself mostly with the slopes of Cone Mountain and Maple Hill where they overlook the unfortunate
hamlet, and I gave particular attention to the loose earth of the landslide region on the latter
eminence.
The afternoon of my search brought nothing to light, and dusk came as I stood
on Maple Hill looking down at the hamlet and across the valley to Tempest Mountain. There had
been a gorgeous sunset, and now the moon came up, nearly full and shedding a silver flood over
the plain, the distant mountainside, and the curious low mounds that rose here and there. It
was a peaceful Arcadian scene, but knowing what it hid I hated it. I hated the mocking moon,
the hypocritical plain, the festering mountain, and those sinister mounds. Everything seemed
to me tainted with a loathsome contagion, and inspired by a noxious alliance with distorted
hidden powers.
Presently, as I gazed abstractedly at the moonlit panorama, my eye became attracted
by something singular in the nature and arrangement of a certain topographical element. Without
having any exact knowledge of geology, I had from the first been interested in the odd mounds
and hummocks of the region. I had noticed that they were pretty widely distributed around Tempest
Mountain, though less numerous on the plain than near the hill-top itself, where prehistoric
glaciation had doubtless found feebler opposition to its striking and fantastic caprices. Now,
in the light of that low moon which cast long weird shadows, it struck me forcibly that the
various points and lines of the mound system had a peculiar relation to the summit of Tempest
Mountain. That summit was undeniably a centre from which the lines or rows of points radiated
indefinitely and irregularly, as if the unwholesome Martense mansion had thrown visible tentacles
of terror. The idea of such tentacles gave me an unexplained thrill, and I stopped to analyse
my reason for believing these mounds glacial phenomena.
The more I analysed the less I believed, and against my newly opened mind there
began to beat grotesque and horrible analogies based on superficial aspects and upon my experience
beneath the earth. Before I knew it I was uttering frenzied and disjointed words to myself:
“My God! . . . Molehills . . . the damned place must be honeycombed . . .
how many . . . that night at the mansion . . . they took Bennett
and Tobey first . . . on each side of us. . . .” Then I
was digging frantically into the mound which had stretched nearest me; digging desperately,
shiveringly, but almost jubilantly; digging and at last shrieking aloud with some unplaced emotion
as I came upon a tunnel or burrow just like the one through which I had crawled on that other
daemoniac night.
After that I recall running, spade in hand; a hideous run across moon-litten,
mound-marked meadows and through diseased, precipitous abysses of haunted hillside forest; leaping,
screaming, panting, bounding toward the terrible Martense mansion. I recall digging unreasoningly
in all parts of the brier-choked cellar; digging to find the core and centre of that malignant
universe of mounds. And then I recall how I laughed when I stumbled on the passageway; the hole
at the base of the old chimney, where the thick weeds grew and cast queer shadows in the light
of the lone candle I had happened to have with me. What still remained down in that hell-hive,
lurking and waiting for the thunder to arouse it, I did not know. Two had been killed; perhaps
that had finished it. But still there remained that burning determination to reach the innermost
secret of the fear, which I had once more come to deem definite, material, and organic.
My indecisive speculation whether to explore the passage alone and immediately
with my pocket-light or to try to assemble a band of squatters for the quest, was interrupted
after a time by a sudden rush of wind from outside which blew out the candle and left me in
stark blackness. The moon no longer shone through the chinks and apertures above me, and with
a sense of fateful alarm I heard the sinister and significant rumble of approaching thunder.
A confusion of associated ideas possessed my brain, leading me to grope back toward the farthest
corner of the cellar. My eyes, however, never turned away from the horrible opening at the base
of the chimney; and I began to get glimpses of the crumbling bricks and unhealthy weeds as faint
glows of lightning penetrated the woods outside and illumined the chinks in the upper wall.
Every second I was consumed with a mixture of fear and curiosity. What would the storm call
forth—or was there anything left for it to call? Guided by a lightning flash I settled
myself down behind a dense clump of vegetation, through which I could see the opening without
being seen.
If heaven is merciful, it will some day efface from my consciousness the sight
that I saw, and let me live my last years in peace. I cannot sleep at night now, and have to
take opiates when it thunders. The thing came abruptly and unannounced; a daemon, rat-like scurrying
from pits remote and unimaginable, a hellish panting and stifled grunting, and then from that
opening beneath the chimney a burst of multitudinous and leprous life—a loathsome night-spawned
flood of organic corruption more devastatingly hideous than the blackest conjurations of mortal
madness and morbidity. Seething, stewing, surging, bubbling like serpents’ slime it rolled
up and out of that yawning hole, spreading like a septic contagion and streaming from the cellar
at every point of egress—streaming out to scatter through the accursed midnight forests
and strew fear, madness, and death.
God knows how many there were—there must have been thousands. To see
the stream of them in that faint, intermittent lightning was shocking. When they had thinned
out enough to be glimpsed as separate organisms, I saw that they were dwarfed, deformed hairy
devils or apes—monstrous and diabolic caricatures of the monkey tribe. They were so hideously
silent; there was hardly a squeal when one of the last stragglers turned with the skill of long
practice to make a meal in accustomed fashion on a weaker companion. Others snapped up what
it left and ate with slavering relish. Then, in spite of my daze of fright and disgust, my morbid
curiosity triumphed; and as the last of the monstrosities oozed up alone from that nether world
of unknown nightmare, I drew my automatic pistol and shot it under cover of the thunder.
Shrieking, slithering, torrential shadows of red viscous madness chasing one
another through endless, ensanguined corridors of purple fulgurous sky . . .
formless phantasms and kaleidoscopic mutations of a ghoulish, remembered scene; forests of monstrous
overnourished oaks with serpent roots twisting and sucking unnamable juices from an earth verminous
with millions of cannibal devils; mound-like tentacles groping from underground nuclei of polypous
perversion . . . insane lightning over malignant ivied walls and daemon arcades
choked with fungous vegetation. . . . Heaven be thanked for the instinct which
led me unconscious to places where men dwell; to the peaceful village that slept under the calm
stars of clearing skies.
I had recovered enough in a week to send to Albany for a gang of men to blow
up the Martense mansion and the entire top of Tempest Mountain with dynamite, stop up all the
discoverable mound-burrows, and destroy certain overnourished trees whose very existence seemed
an insult to sanity. I could sleep a little after they had done this, but true rest will never
come as long as I remember that nameless secret of the lurking fear. The thing will haunt me,
for who can say the extermination is complete, and that analogous phenomena do not exist all
over the world? Who can, with my knowledge, think of the earth’s unknown caverns without
a nightmare dread of future possibilities? I cannot see a well or a subway entrance without
shuddering . . . why cannot the doctors give me something to make me sleep, or
truly calm my brain when it thunders?
What I saw in the glow of my flashlight after I shot the unspeakable straggling
object was so simple that almost a minute elapsed before I understood and went delirious. The
object was nauseous; a filthy whitish gorilla thing with sharp yellow fangs and matted fur.
It was the ultimate product of mammalian degeneration; the frightful outcome of isolated spawning,
multiplication, and cannibal nutrition above and below the ground; the embodiment of all the
snarling chaos and grinning fear that lurk behind life. It had looked at me as it died, and
its eyes had the same odd quality that marked those other eyes which had stared at me underground
and excited cloudy recollections. One eye was blue, the other brown. They were the dissimilar
Martense eyes of the old legends, and I knew in one inundating cataclysm of voiceless horror
what had become of that vanished family; the terrible and thunder-crazed house of Martense.


The Mystery of the Grave-Yard

Chapter IThe Burns’s Tomb.

It was noon in the Little village of Mainville, and a sorrowful group of people were standing
around the Burns’s Tomb. Joseph Burns was dead. (when dying, he had given the following
strange orders:—“Before you put my body in the tomb, drop this ball onto the floor,
at a spot marked “A”.” he then handed a small golden ball to the rector.)
The people greatly regretted his death. After The funeral services were finished, Mr Dobson
(the rector) said, “My friends, I will now gratify the last wishes of the deceased. So
saying, he descended into the tomb. (to lay the ball on the spot marked “A”) Soon
the funeral party Began to be impatient, and after a time Mr. Cha’s. Greene (the Lawyer)
descended to make a search. Soon he came up with a frightened face, and said, “Mr Dobson
is not there”!
Chapter IIMysterious Mr. Bell.
It was 3.10 o’clock in ye afternoone
whenne The door bell of the Dobson mansion rang loudly, and the servant on going to the door,
found an elderly man, with black hair, and side whiskers. He asked to see Miss Dobson. Upon
arriving in her presence he said, “Miss Dobson, I know where your father is, and for £10,000
I will restore him. My name is Mr. Bell.” “Mr. Bell,” said Miss Dobson, “will
you excuse me from the room a moment?” “Certainly”. replied Mr Bell. In a
short time she returned, and said, “Mr. Bell, I understand you. You have abducted my father,
and hold him for a ransom”
Chapter IIIAt The Police Station.
It was 3.20 o’clock in the afternoon when the telephone bell at the North
End Police Station rang furiously, and Gibson, (the telephone Man) Inquired what was the matter,
“Have found out about fathers dissapearance”! a womans voice said.
“Im Miss Dobson, and father has been abducted, “Send King John”! King John
was a famous western detective. Just then a man rushed in, and shouted, “Oh! Terrors!
Come To the Graveyard!”
Chapter IVThe West window.
Now let us return to the Dobson Mansion. Mr Bell was rather taken aback by
Miss Dobson’s plain speaking, but when he recovered his speech he said, “Don’t
put it quite so plain, Miss Dobson, for I—” He was interrupted by the entrance of
King John, who with a brace of revolvers in his hands, barred all egress by the doorway. But
quicker than thought Bell sprang to a west window,—and jumped.
Chapter VThe Secret of The grave.
Now let us return to the station house. After the exited visitor had calmed
somewhat, he could tell his story straighter. He had seen three men in the graveyard shouting
“Bell! Bell! where are you old man!?” and acting very suspiciously. He then followed
them, and they entered The Burns’s Tomb! He then followed them in and they touched
a spring at a point marked “A” and then Dissapeared”. “I wish king John
were here”, Said Gibson, “What’s your name,”? “John Spratt”.
replied the visitor.
Chapter VIThe chase for Bell.
Now let us return To the Dobson Mansion again:—King John was utterly
confounded at the Sudden movement of Bell, but when he recovered from his surprise, his first
thought was of chase. Accordingly, he started in pursuit of the abductor. He tracked him down
to the R. R. Station and found to his dismay that he had taken the train for Kent, a large city
toward the south, and between which and Mainville there existed no telegraph or telephone. The
train had Just Started!
Chapter VIIThe Negro Hackman.
The Kent train started at 10.35, and about 10.36 an exited, dusty, and tired
man1 rushed into the Mainville hack. office and said to a
negro hackman who was standing by the door—“If you can take me to Kent in 15 minutes
I will give you a dollar”. “I doan’ see how I’m ter git there”,
said the negro “I hab’n’t got a decent pair of hosses an’ I hab—”
“Two Dollars”! Shouted The Traveller, “all right” said the Hackman.
1King John.
Chapter VIIIBells Surprise.
It was 11 o’clock at Kent, all of the stores were closed but one, a dingy,
dirty, little shop, down at the west end. It lay between Kent Harbour, & the Kent &
Mainville R.R. In the Front room a shabbily dressed person of doubtful age was conversing with
a middle aged woman with gray haire, “I have agreed to do the job, Lindy,” he said,
“Bell will arrive at 11.30 and the carraige is ready to take him down to the wharf, where
a ship for Africa sails to-nighte”.
“But If King John were to come?” queried “Lindy”
“Then we’d get nabbed, an’ Bell would be hung” Replied
The man.
Just then a rap sounded at the door “Are you Bell”? inquired Lindy
“Yes” was the response, “And I caught the 10.35 and King John got Left, so
we are all right”. At 11.40 the party reached The Landing, and saw a ship Loom up in the
darkness. “The Kehdive” “of Africa” was painted on the hull, and Just
as they were to step on board, a man stepped forward in the darkness and said “John Bell,
I arrest you in the Queen’s name”!
It was King John.
Chapter IXThe Trial.
The daye of The Trial had arrived, and a crowd of people had gathered around
the Little grove, (which served for a court house in summer) To hear the trial of John Bell
on the charge of kid-napping. “Mr. Bell,” said the judge “what is the
secret of the Burns’s tomb”
“I well tell you this much” said Bell, “If you go into the
tomb and touch a certain spot marked “A” you will find out”
“Now where is Mr Dobson”? queried the judge, “Here”!
said a voice behind them, and The figure of Mr Dobson HIMSELF loomed up in the doorway.
“How did you get here”!&c was chorused. “’Tis
a long story,” said Dobson.
Chapter XDobson’s Story.
“When I went down into the tomb,” Said Dobson, “Everything
was darkness, I could see nothing. but Finally I discerned the letter “A” printed
in white on the onyx floor, I dropped the ball on the Letter, and immediately a trap-door
opened and a man sprang up. It was this man, here,” (he said (pointing at Bell, who stood
Trembling on the prisoner’s docke) “and he pulled me down into a brilliantly lighted,
and palatial apartment where I have Lived until to-day. One day a young man rushed in
and exclaimed “The secret Is revealed!” and was gone. He did not see me. Once Bell
left his key behind, and I took the impression in wax, and the next day was spent in filing
keys to fit the Lock. The next day my key fitted. and the next day (which is to-day) I
escaped.”
Chapter XIThe Mystery unveiled.
“Why did the late J. Burns, ask you to put the ball there”? (at
“A”?) queried the Judge? “To get me into trouble” replied Dobson “He,
and Francis Burns, (his brother) have plotted against me for years, and I knew not, in what
way they would harm me”. “Sieze Francis Burns”! yelled the Judge.
Chapter XIIConclusion.
Francis Burns, and John Bell, were sent to prison for life. Mr Dobson was cordially
welcomed by his daughter, who, by the way had become Mrs King John. “Lindy” and
her accomplice were sent to Newgate for 30 days as aidors and abbettors of a criminal escape.
The End.
Price 25¢


The Outsider





That night the Baron dreamt of many a woe;
            And all his warrior-guests, with shade and form
            Of witch, and demon, and large coffin-worm,
            Were long be-nightmared.
—Keats.







Unhappy is he to whom the memories of childhood bring only fear and sadness. Wretched is he
who looks back upon lone hours in vast and dismal chambers with brown hangings and maddening
rows of antique books, or upon awed watches in twilight groves of grotesque, gigantic, and vine-encumbered
trees that silently wave twisted branches far aloft. Such a lot the gods gave to me—to
me, the dazed, the disappointed; the barren, the broken. And yet I am strangely content, and
cling desperately to those sere memories, when my mind momentarily threatens to reach beyond
to the other.

I know not where I was born, save that the castle was infinitely old and infinitely horrible;
full of dark passages and having high ceilings where the eye could find only cobwebs and shadows.
The stones in the crumbling corridors seemed always hideously damp, and there was an accursed
smell everywhere, as of the piled-up corpses of dead generations. It was never light, so that
I used sometimes to light candles and gaze steadily at them for relief; nor was there any sun
outdoors, since the terrible trees grew high above the topmost accessible tower. There was one
black tower which reached above the trees into the unknown outer sky, but that was partly ruined
and could not be ascended save by a well-nigh impossible climb up the sheer wall, stone by stone.

I must have lived years in this place, but I cannot measure the time. Beings must have cared
for my needs, yet I cannot recall any person except myself; or anything alive but the noiseless
rats and bats and spiders. I think that whoever nursed me must have been shockingly aged, since
my first conception of a living person was that of something mockingly like myself, yet distorted,
shrivelled, and decaying like the castle. To me there was nothing grotesque in the bones and
skeletons that strowed some of the stone crypts deep down among the foundations. I fantastically
associated these things with every-day events, and thought them more natural than the coloured
pictures of living beings which I found in many of the mouldy books. From such books I learned
all that I know. No teacher urged or guided me, and I do not recall hearing any human voice
in all those years—not even my own; for although I had read of speech, I had never thought
to try to speak aloud. My aspect was a matter equally unthought of, for there were no mirrors
in the castle, and I merely regarded myself by instinct as akin to the youthful figures I saw
drawn and painted in the books. I felt conscious of youth because I remembered so little.

Outside, across the putrid moat and under the dark mute trees, I would often lie and dream for
hours about what I read in the books; and would longingly picture myself amidst gay crowds in
the sunny world beyond the endless forest. Once I tried to escape from the forest, but as I
went farther from the castle the shade grew denser and the air more filled with brooding fear;
so that I ran frantically back lest I lose my way in a labyrinth of nighted silence.

So through endless twilights I dreamed and waited, though I knew not what I waited for. Then
in the shadowy solitude my longing for light grew so frantic that I could rest no more, and
I lifted entreating hands to the single black ruined tower that reached above the forest into
the unknown outer sky. And at last I resolved to scale that tower, fall though I might; since
it were better to glimpse the sky and perish, than to live without ever beholding day.

In the dank twilight I climbed the worn and aged stone stairs till I reached the level where
they ceased, and thereafter clung perilously to small footholds leading upward. Ghastly and
terrible was that dead, stairless cylinder of rock; black, ruined, and deserted, and sinister
with startled bats whose wings made no noise. But more ghastly and terrible still was the slowness
of my progress; for climb as I might, the darkness overhead grew no thinner, and a new chill
as of haunted and venerable mould assailed me. I shivered as I wondered why I did not reach
the light, and would have looked down had I dared. I fancied that night had come suddenly upon
me, and vainly groped with one free hand for a window embrasure, that I might peer out and above,
and try to judge the height I had attained.

All at once, after an infinity of awesome, sightless crawling up that concave and desperate
precipice, I felt my head touch a solid thing, and I knew I must have gained the roof, or at
least some kind of floor. In the darkness I raised my free hand and tested the barrier, finding
it stone and immovable. Then came a deadly circuit of the tower, clinging to whatever holds
the slimy wall could give; till finally my testing hand found the barrier yielding, and I turned
upward again, pushing the slab or door with my head as I used both hands in my fearful ascent.
There was no light revealed above, and as my hands went higher I knew that my climb was for
the nonce ended; since the slab was the trap-door of an aperture leading to a level stone surface
of greater circumference than the lower tower, no doubt the floor of some lofty and capacious
observation chamber. I crawled through carefully, and tried to prevent the heavy slab from falling
back into place; but failed in the latter attempt. As I lay exhausted on the stone floor I heard
the eerie echoes of its fall, but hoped when necessary to pry it open again.

Believing I was now at a prodigious height, far above the accursed branches of the wood, I dragged
myself up from the floor and fumbled about for windows, that I might look for the first time
upon the sky, and the moon and stars of which I had read. But on every hand I was disappointed;
since all that I found were vast shelves of marble, bearing odious oblong boxes of disturbing
size. More and more I reflected, and wondered what hoary secrets might abide in this high apartment
so many aeons cut off from the castle below. Then unexpectedly my hands came upon a doorway,
where hung a portal of stone, rough with strange chiselling. Trying it, I found it locked; but
with a supreme burst of strength I overcame all obstacles and dragged it open inward. As I did
so there came to me the purest ecstasy I have ever known; for shining tranquilly through an
ornate grating of iron, and down a short stone passageway of steps that ascended from the newly
found doorway, was the radiant full moon, which I had never before seen save in dreams and in
vague visions I dared not call memories.

Fancying now that I had attained the very pinnacle of the castle, I commenced to rush up the
few steps beyond the door; but the sudden veiling of the moon by a cloud caused me to stumble,
and I felt my way more slowly in the dark. It was still very dark when I reached the grating—which
I tried carefully and found unlocked, but which I did not open for fear of falling from the
amazing height to which I had climbed. Then the moon came out.

Most daemoniacal of all shocks is that of the abysmally unexpected and grotesquely unbelievable.
Nothing I had before undergone could compare in terror with what I now saw; with the bizarre
marvels that sight implied. The sight itself was as simple as it was stupefying, for it was
merely this: instead of a dizzying prospect of treetops seen from a lofty eminence, there stretched
around me on a level through the grating nothing less than the solid ground, decked and
diversified by marble slabs and columns, and overshadowed by an ancient stone church, whose
ruined spire gleamed spectrally in the moonlight.

Half unconscious, I opened the grating and staggered out upon the white gravel path that stretched
away in two directions. My mind, stunned and chaotic as it was, still held the frantic craving
for light; and not even the fantastic wonder which had happened could stay my course. I neither
knew nor cared whether my experience was insanity, dreaming, or magic; but was determined to
gaze on brilliance and gaiety at any cost. I knew not who I was or what I was, or what my surroundings
might be; though as I continued to stumble along I became conscious of a kind of fearsome latent
memory that made my progress not wholly fortuitous. I passed under an arch out of that region
of slabs and columns, and wandered through the open country; sometimes following the visible
road, but sometimes leaving it curiously to tread across meadows where only occasional ruins
bespoke the ancient presence of a forgotten road. Once I swam across a swift river where crumbling,
mossy masonry told of a bridge long vanished.

Over two hours must have passed before I reached what seemed to be my goal, a venerable ivied
castle in a thickly wooded park; maddeningly familiar, yet full of perplexing strangeness to
me. I saw that the moat was filled in, and that some of the well-known towers were demolished;
whilst new wings existed to confuse the beholder. But what I observed with chief interest and
delight were the open windows—gorgeously ablaze with light and sending forth sound of
the gayest revelry. Advancing to one of these I looked in and saw an oddly dressed company,
indeed; making merry, and speaking brightly to one another. I had never, seemingly, heard human
speech before; and could guess only vaguely what was said. Some of the faces seemed to hold
expressions that brought up incredibly remote recollections; others were utterly alien.

I now stepped through the low window into the brilliantly lighted room, stepping as I did so
from my single bright moment of hope to my blackest convulsion of despair and realisation. The
nightmare was quick to come; for as I entered, there occurred immediately one of the most terrifying
demonstrations I had ever conceived. Scarcely had I crossed the sill when there descended upon
the whole company a sudden and unheralded fear of hideous intensity, distorting every face and
evoking the most horrible screams from nearly every throat. Flight was universal, and in the
clamour and panic several fell in a swoon and were dragged away by their madly fleeing companions.
Many covered their eyes with their hands, and plunged blindly and awkwardly in their race to
escape; overturning furniture and stumbling against the walls before they managed to reach one
of the many doors.

The cries were shocking; and as I stood in the brilliant apartment alone and dazed, listening
to their vanishing echoes, I trembled at the thought of what might be lurking near me unseen.
At a casual inspection the room seemed deserted, but when I moved toward one of the alcoves
I thought I detected a presence there—a hint of motion beyond the golden-arched doorway
leading to another and somewhat similar room. As I approached the arch I began to perceive the
presence more clearly; and then, with the first and last sound I ever uttered—a ghastly
ululation that revolted me almost as poignantly as its noxious cause—I beheld in full,
frightful vividness the inconceivable, indescribable, and unmentionable monstrosity which had
by its simple appearance changed a merry company to a herd of delirious fugitives.

I cannot even hint what it was like, for it was a compound of all that is unclean, uncanny,
unwelcome, abnormal, and detestable. It was the ghoulish shade of decay, antiquity, and desolation;
the putrid, dripping eidolon of unwholesome revelation; the awful baring of that which the merciful
earth should always hide. God knows it was not of this world—or no longer of this world—yet
to my horror I saw in its eaten-away and bone-revealing outlines a leering, abhorrent travesty
on the human shape; and in its mouldy, disintegrating apparel an unspeakable quality that chilled
me even more.

I was almost paralysed, but not too much so to make a feeble effort toward flight; a backward
stumble which failed to break the spell in which the nameless, voiceless monster held me. My
eyes, bewitched by the glassy orbs which stared loathsomely into them, refused to close; though
they were mercifully blurred, and shewed the terrible object but indistinctly after the first
shock. I tried to raise my hand to shut out the sight, yet so stunned were my nerves that my
arm could not fully obey my will. The attempt, however, was enough to disturb my balance; so
that I had to stagger forward several steps to avoid falling. As I did so I became suddenly
and agonisingly aware of the nearness of the carrion thing, whose hideous hollow breathing
I half fancied I could hear. Nearly mad, I found myself yet able to throw out a hand to ward
off the foetid apparition which pressed so close; when in one cataclysmic second of cosmic nightmarishness
and hellish accident my fingers touched the rotting outstretched paw of the monster beneath
the golden arch.

I did not shriek, but all the fiendish ghouls that ride the night-wind shrieked for me as in
that same second there crashed down upon my mind a single and fleeting avalanche of soul-annihilating
memory. I knew in that second all that had been; I remembered beyond the frightful castle and
the trees, and recognised the altered edifice in which I now stood; I recognised, most terrible
of all, the unholy abomination that stood leering before me as I withdrew my sullied fingers
from its own.

But in the cosmos there is balm as well as bitterness, and that balm is nepenthe. In the supreme
horror of that second I forgot what had horrified me, and the burst of black memory vanished
in a chaos of echoing images. In a dream I fled from that haunted and accursed pile, and ran
swiftly and silently in the moonlight. When I returned to the churchyard place of marble and
went down the steps I found the stone trap-door immovable; but I was not sorry, for I had hated
the antique castle and the trees. Now I ride with the mocking and friendly ghouls on the night-wind,
and play by day amongst the catacombs of Nephren-Ka in the sealed and unknown valley of Hadoth
by the Nile. I know that light is not for me, save that of the moon over the rock tombs of Neb,
nor any gaiety save the unnamed feasts of Nitokris beneath the Great Pyramid; yet in my new
wildness and freedom I almost welcome the bitterness of alienage.

For although nepenthe has calmed me, I know always that I am an outsider; a stranger in this
century and among those who are still men. This I have known ever since I stretched out my fingers
to the abomination within that great gilded frame; stretched out my fingers and touched a
cold and unyielding surface of polished glass.


The Shadow out of Time

I.

After twenty-two years of nightmare and terror, saved only by a desperate conviction of the
mythical source of certain impressions, I am unwilling to vouch for the truth of that which
I think I found in Western Australia on the night of July 17–18, 1935. There is reason
to hope that my experience was wholly or partly an hallucination—for which, indeed, abundant
causes existed. And yet, its realism was so hideous that I sometimes find hope impossible. If
the thing did happen, then man must be prepared to accept notions of the cosmos, and of his
own place in the seething vortex of time, whose merest mention is paralysing. He must, too,
be placed on guard against a specific lurking peril which, though it will never engulf the whole
race, may impose monstrous and unguessable horrors upon certain venturesome members of it. It
is for this latter reason that I urge, with all the force of my being, a final abandonment of
all attempts at unearthing those fragments of unknown, primordial masonry which my expedition
set out to investigate.
Assuming that I was sane and awake, my experience on that night was such as
has befallen no man before. It was, moreover, a frightful confirmation of all I had sought to
dismiss as myth and dream. Mercifully there is no proof, for in my fright I lost the awesome
object which would—if real and brought out of that noxious abyss—have formed irrefutable
evidence. When I came upon the horror I was alone—and I have up to now told no one about
it. I could not stop the others from digging in its direction, but chance and the shifting sand
have so far saved them from finding it. Now I must formulate some definitive statement—not
only for the sake of my own mental balance, but to warn such others as may read it seriously.
These pages—much in whose earlier parts will be familiar to close readers
of the general and scientific press—are written in the cabin of the ship that is bringing
me home. I shall give them to my son, Prof. Wingate Peaslee of Miskatonic University—the
only member of my family who stuck to me after my queer amnesia of long ago, and the man best
informed on the inner facts of my case. Of all living persons, he is least likely to ridicule
what I shall tell of that fateful night. I did not enlighten him orally before sailing, because
I think he had better have the revelation in written form. Reading and re-reading at leisure
will leave with him a more convincing picture than my confused tongue could hope to convey.
He can do as he thinks best with this account—shewing it, with suitable comment, to any
quarters where it will be likely to accomplish good. It is for the sake of such readers as are
unfamiliar with the earlier phases of my case that I am prefacing the revelation itself with
a fairly ample summary of its background.
My name is Nathaniel Wingate Peaslee, and those who recall the newspaper tales
of a generation back—or the letters and articles in psychological journals six or seven
years ago—will know who and what I am. The press was filled with the details of my strange
amnesia in 1908–13, and much was made of the traditions of horror, madness, and witchcraft
which lurk behind the ancient Massachusetts town then and now forming my place of residence.
Yet I would have it known that there is nothing whatever of the mad or sinister in my heredity
and early life. This is a highly important fact in view of the shadow which fell so suddenly
upon me from outside sources. It may be that centuries of dark brooding had given to
crumbling, whisper-haunted Arkham a peculiar vulnerability as regards such shadows—though
even this seems doubtful in the light of those other cases which I later came to study. But
the chief point is that my own ancestry and background are altogether normal. What came, came
from somewhere else—where, I even now hesitate to assert in plain words.
I am the son of Jonathan and Hannah (Wingate) Peaslee, both of wholesome old
Haverhill stock. I was born and reared in Haverhill—at the old homestead in Boardman Street
near Golden Hill—and did not go to Arkham till I entered Miskatonic University at the
age of eighteen. That was in 1889. After my graduation I studied economics at Harvard, and came
back to Miskatonic as Instructor of Political Economy in 1895. For thirteen years more my life
ran smoothly and happily. I married Alice Keezar of Haverhill in 1896, and my three children,
Robert K., Wingate, and Hannah, were born in 1898, 1900, and 1903, respectively. In 1898 I became
an associate professor, and in 1902 a full professor. At no time had I the least interest in
either occultism or abnormal psychology.
It was on Thursday, May 14, 1908, that the queer amnesia came. The thing was
quite sudden, though later I realised that certain brief, glimmering visions of several hours
previous—chaotic visions which disturbed me greatly because they were so unprecedented—must
have formed premonitory symptoms. My head was aching, and I had a singular feeling—altogether
new to me—that someone else was trying to get possession of my thoughts. 
The collapse occurred about 10:20 a.m., while I was conducting a class in Political
Economy VI—history and present tendencies of economics—for juniors and a few sophomores.
I began to see strange shapes before my eyes, and to feel that I was in a grotesque room other
than the classroom. My thoughts and speech wandered from my subject, and the students saw that
something was gravely amiss. Then I slumped down, unconscious in my chair, in a stupor from
which no one could arouse me. Nor did my rightful faculties again look out upon the daylight
of our normal world for five years, four months, and thirteen days.
It is, of course, from others that I have learned what followed. I shewed no
sign of consciousness for sixteen and a half hours, though removed to my home at 27 Crane St.
and given the best of medical attention. At 3 a.m. May 15 my eyes opened and I began to speak,
but before long the doctors and my family were thoroughly frightened by the trend of my expression
and language. It was clear that I had no remembrance of my identity or of my past, though for
some reason I seemed anxious to conceal this lack of knowledge. My eyes gazed strangely at the
persons around me, and the flexions of my facial muscles were altogether unfamiliar.
Even my speech seemed awkward and foreign. I used my vocal organs clumsily
and gropingly, and my diction had a curiously stilted quality, as if I had laboriously learned
the English language from books. The pronunciation was barbarously alien, whilst the idiom seemed
to include both scraps of curious archaism and expressions of a wholly incomprehensible cast.
Of the latter one in particular was very potently—even terrifiedly—recalled by the
youngest of the physicians twenty years afterward. For at that late period such a phrase began
to have an actual currency—first in England and then in the United States—and though
of much complexity and indisputable newness, it reproduced in every least particular the mystifying
words of the strange Arkham patient of 1908.
Physical strength returned at once, although I required an odd amount of re-education
in the use of my hands, legs, and bodily apparatus in general. Because of this and other handicaps
inherent in the mnemonic lapse, I was for some time kept under strict medical care. When I saw
that my attempts to conceal the lapse had failed, I admitted it openly, and became eager for
information of all sorts. Indeed, it seemed to the doctors that I had lost interest in my proper
personality as soon as I found the case of amnesia accepted as a natural thing. They noticed
that my chief efforts were to master certain points in history, science, art, language, and
folklore—some of them tremendously abstruse, and some childishly simple—which remained,
very oddly in many cases, outside my consciousness.
At the same time they noticed that I had an inexplicable command of many almost
unknown sorts of knowledge—a command which I seemed to wish to hide rather than display.
I would inadvertently refer, with casual assurance, to specific events in dim ages outside the
range of accepted history—passing off such references as a jest when I saw the surprise
they created. And I had a way of speaking of the future which two or three times caused actual
fright. These uncanny flashes soon ceased to appear, though some observers laid their vanishment
more to a certain furtive caution on my part than to any waning of the strange knowledge behind
them. Indeed, I seemed anomalously avid to absorb the speech, customs, and perspectives of the
age around me; as if I were a studious traveller from a far, foreign land.
As soon as permitted, I haunted the college library at all hours; and shortly
began to arrange for those odd travels, and special courses at American and European universities,
which evoked so much comment during the next few years. I did not at any time suffer from a
lack of learned contacts, for my case had a mild celebrity among the psychologists of the period.
I was lectured upon as a typical example of secondary personality—even though I seemed
to puzzle the lecturers now and then with some bizarre symptom or some queer trace of carefully
veiled mockery.
Of real friendliness, however, I encountered little. Something in my aspect
and speech seemed to excite vague fears and aversions in everyone I met, as if I were a being
infinitely removed from all that is normal and healthful. This idea of a black, hidden horror
connected with incalculable gulfs of some sort of distance was oddly widespread and persistent.
My own family formed no exception. From the moment of my strange waking my wife had regarded
me with extreme horror and loathing, vowing that I was some utter alien usurping the body of
her husband. In 1910 she obtained a legal divorce, nor would she ever consent to see me even
after my return to normalcy in 1913. These feelings were shared by my elder son and my small
daughter, neither of whom I have ever seen since.
Only my second son Wingate seemed able to conquer the terror and repulsion
which my change aroused. He indeed felt that I was a stranger, but though only eight years old
held fast to a faith that my proper self would return. When it did return he sought me out,
and the courts gave me his custody. In succeeding years he helped me with the studies to which
I was driven, and today at thirty-five he is a professor of psychology at Miskatonic. But I
do not wonder at the horror I caused—for certainly, the mind, voice, and facial expression
of the being that awaked on May 15, 1908 were not those of Nathaniel Wingate Peaslee.
I will not attempt to tell much of my life from 1908 to 1913, since readers
may glean all the outward essentials—as I largely had to do—from files of old newspapers
and scientific journals. I was given charge of my funds, and spent them slowly and on the whole
wisely, in travel and in study at various centres of learning. My travels, however, were singular
in the extreme; involving long visits to remote and desolate places. In 1909 I spent a month
in the Himalayas, and in 1911 aroused much attention through a camel trip into the unknown deserts
of Arabia. What happened on those journeys I have never been able to learn. During the summer
of 1912 I chartered a ship and sailed in the Arctic north of Spitzbergen, afterward shewing
signs of disappointment. Later in that year I spent weeks alone beyond the limits of previous
or subsequent exploration in the vast limestone cavern systems of western Virginia—black
labyrinths so complex that no retracing of my steps could even be considered.
My sojourns at the universities were marked by abnormally rapid assimilation,
as if the secondary personality had an intelligence enormously superior to my own. I have found,
also, that my rate of reading and solitary study was phenomenal. I could master every detail
of a book merely by glancing over it as fast as I could turn the leaves; while my skill at interpreting
complex figures in an instant was veritably awesome. At times there appeared almost ugly reports
of my power to influence the thoughts and acts of others, though I seemed to have taken care
to minimise displays of this faculty.
Other ugly reports concerned my intimacy with leaders of occultist groups,
and scholars suspected of connexion with nameless bands of abhorrent elder-world hierophants.
These rumours, though never proved at the time, were doubtless stimulated by the known tenor
of some of my reading—for the consultation of rare books at libraries cannot be effected
secretly. There is tangible proof—in the form of marginal notes—that I went minutely
through such things as the Comte d’Erlette’s Cultes des Goules, Ludvig Prinn’s
De Vermis Mysteriis, the Unaussprechlichen Kulten of von Junzt, the surviving
fragments of the puzzling Book of Eibon, and the dreaded Necronomicon of the mad
Arab Abdul Alhazred. Then, too, it is undeniable that a fresh and evil wave of underground cult
activity set in about the time of my odd mutation.
In the summer of 1913 I began to display signs of ennui and flagging interest,
and to hint to various associates that a change might soon be expected in me. I spoke of returning
memories of my earlier life—though most auditors judged me insincere, since all the recollections
I gave were casual, and such as might have been learned from my old private papers. About the
middle of August I returned to Arkham and reopened my long-closed house in Crane St. Here I
installed a mechanism of the most curious aspect, constructed piecemeal by different makers
of scientific apparatus in Europe and America, and guarded carefully from the sight of anyone
intelligent enough to analyse it. Those who did see it—a workman, a servant, and the new
housekeeper—say that it was a queer mixture of rods, wheels, and mirrors, though only
about two feet tall, one foot wide, and one foot thick. The central mirror was circular and
convex. All this is borne out by such makers of parts as can be located.
On the evening of Friday, Sept. 26, I dismissed the housekeeper and the maid
till noon of the next day. Lights burned in the house till late, and a lean, dark, curiously
foreign-looking man called in an automobile. It was about 1 a.m. that the lights were last seen.
At 2:15 a.m. a policeman observed the place in darkness, but with the stranger’s motor
still at the curb. By four o’clock the motor was certainly gone. It was at six that a
hesitant, foreign voice on the telephone asked Dr. Wilson to call at my house and bring me out
of a peculiar faint. This call—a long-distance one—was later traced to a public
booth in the North Station in Boston, but no sign of the lean foreigner was ever unearthed.
When the doctor reached my house he found me unconscious in the sitting-room—in
an easy-chair with a table drawn up before it. On the polished table-top were scratches shewing
where some heavy object had rested. The queer machine was gone, nor was anything afterward heard
of it. Undoubtedly the dark, lean foreigner had taken it away. In the library grate were abundant
ashes evidently left from the burning of every remaining scrap of paper on which I had written
since the advent of the amnesia. Dr. Wilson found my breathing very peculiar, but after an hypodermic
injection it became more regular.
At 11:15 a.m., Sept. 27, I stirred vigorously, and my hitherto mask-like face
began to shew signs of expression. Dr. Wilson remarked that the expression was not that of my
secondary personality, but seemed much like that of my normal self. About 11:30 I muttered some
very curious syllables—syllables which seemed unrelated to any human speech. I appeared,
too, to struggle against something. Then, just after noon—the housekeeper and the maid
having meanwhile returned—I began to mutter in English.
“. . . of the orthodox economists of that period, Jevons typifies
the prevailing trend toward scientific correlation. His attempt to link the commercial cycle
of prosperity and depression with the physical cycle of the solar spots forms perhaps the apex
of . . .”
Nathaniel Wingate Peaslee had come back—a spirit in whose time-scale
it was still that Thursday morning in 1908, with the economics class gazing up at the battered
desk on the platform.
II.

My reabsorption into normal life was a painful and difficult process. The loss of over five
years creates more complications than can be imagined, and in my case there were countless matters
to be adjusted. What I heard of my actions since 1908 astonished and disturbed me, but I tried
to view the matter as philosophically as I could. At last regaining custody of my second son
Wingate, I settled down with him in the Crane Street house and endeavoured to resume teaching—my
old professorship having been kindly offered me by the college.
I began work with the February, 1914, term, and kept at it just a year. By
that time I realised how badly my experience had shaken me. Though perfectly sane—I hoped—and
with no flaw in my original personality, I had not the nervous energy of the old days. Vague
dreams and queer ideas continually haunted me, and when the outbreak of the world war turned
my mind to history I found myself thinking of periods and events in the oddest possible fashion.
My conception of time—my ability to distinguish between consecutiveness and simultaneousness—seemed
subtly disordered; so that I formed chimerical notions about living in one age and casting one’s
mind all over eternity for knowledge of past and future ages.
The war gave me strange impressions of remembering some of its far-off
consequences—as if I knew how it was coming out and could look back upon
it in the light of future information. All such quasi-memories were attended with much pain,
and with a feeling that some artificial psychological barrier was set against them. When I diffidently
hinted to others about my impressions I met with varied responses. Some persons looked uncomfortably
at me, but men in the mathematics department spoke of new developments in those theories of
relativity—then discussed only in learned circles—which were later to become so
famous. Dr. Albert Einstein, they said, was rapidly reducing time to the status of a
mere dimension.
But the dreams and disturbed feelings gained on me, so that I had to drop my
regular work in 1915. Certain of the impressions were taking an annoying shape—giving
me the persistent notion that my amnesia had formed some unholy sort of exchange; that
the secondary personality had indeed been an intruding force from unknown regions, and that
my own personality had suffered displacement. Thus I was driven to vague and frightful speculations
concerning the whereabouts of my true self during the years that another had held my body. The
curious knowledge and strange conduct of my body’s late tenant troubled me more and more
as I learned further details from persons, papers, and magazines. Queernesses that had baffled
others seemed to harmonise terribly with some background of black knowledge which festered in
the chasms of my subconscious. I began to search feverishly for every scrap of information bearing
on the studies and travels of that other one during the dark years.
Not all of my troubles were as semi-abstract as this. There were the dreams—and
these seemed to grow in vividness and concreteness. Knowing how most would regard them, I seldom
mentioned them to anyone but my son or certain trusted psychologists, but eventually I commenced
a scientific study of other cases in order to see how typical or non-typical such visions might
be among amnesia victims. My results, aided by psychologists, historians, anthropologists, and
mental specialists of wide experience, and by a study that included all records of split personalities
from the days of daemoniac-possession legends to the medically realistic present, at first bothered
me more than they consoled me.
I soon found that my dreams had indeed no counterpart in the overwhelming bulk
of true amnesia cases. There remained, however, a tiny residue of accounts which for years baffled
and shocked me with their parallelism to my own experience. Some of them were bits of ancient
folklore; others were case-histories in the annals of medicine; one or two were anecdotes obscurely
buried in standard histories. It thus appeared that, while my special kind of affliction was
prodigiously rare, instances of it had occurred at long intervals ever since the beginning of
man’s annals. Some centuries might contain one, two, or three cases; others none—or
at least none whose record survived.
The essence was always the same—a person of keen thoughtfulness seized
with a strange secondary life and leading for a greater or lesser period an utterly alien existence
typified at first by vocal and bodily awkwardness, and later by a wholesale acquisition of scientific,
historic, artistic, and anthropological knowledge; an acquisition carried on with feverish zest
and with a wholly abnormal absorptive power. Then a sudden return of the rightful consciousness,
intermittently plagued ever after with vague unplaceable dreams suggesting fragments of some
hideous memory elaborately blotted out. And the close resemblance of those nightmares to my
own—even in some of the smallest particulars—left no doubt in my mind of their significantly
typical nature. One or two of the cases had an added ring of faint, blasphemous familiarity,
as if I had heard of them before through some cosmic channel too morbid and frightful to contemplate.
In three instances there was specific mention of such an unknown machine as had been in my house
before the second change.
Another thing that cloudily worried me during my investigation was the somewhat
greater frequency of cases where a brief, elusive glimpse of the typical nightmares was afforded
to persons not visited with well-defined amnesia. These persons were largely of mediocre mind
or less—some so primitive that they could scarcely be thought of as vehicles for abnormal
scholarship and preternatural mental acquisitions. For a second they would be fired with alien
force—then a backward lapse and a thin, swift-fading memory of un-human horrors.
There had been at least three such cases during the past half century—one
only fifteen years before. Had something been groping blindly through time from some
unsuspected abyss in Nature? Were these faint cases monstrous, sinister experiments of
a kind and authorship utterly beyond sane belief? Such were a few of the formless speculations
of my weaker hours—fancies abetted by myths which my studies uncovered. For I could not
doubt but that certain persistent legends of immemorial antiquity, apparently unknown to the
victims and physicians connected with recent amnesia cases, formed a striking and awesome elaboration
of memory lapses such as mine.
Of the nature of the dreams and impressions which were growing so clamorous
I still almost fear to speak. They seemed to savour of madness, and at times I believed I was
indeed going mad. Was there a special type of delusion afflicting those who had suffered lapses
of memory? Conceivably, the efforts of the subconscious mind to fill up a perplexing blank with
pseudo-memories might give rise to strange imaginative vagaries. This, indeed (though an alternative
folklore theory finally seemed to me more plausible), was the belief of many of the alienists
who helped me in my search for parallel cases, and who shared my puzzlement at the exact resemblances
sometimes discovered. They did not call the condition true insanity, but classed it rather among
neurotic disorders. My course in trying to track it down and analyse it, instead of vainly seeking
to dismiss or forget it, they heartily endorsed as correct according to the best psychological
principles. I especially valued the advice of such physicians as had studied me during my possession
by the other personality.
My first disturbances were not visual at all, but concerned the more abstract
matters which I have mentioned. There was, too, a feeling of profound and inexplicable horror
concerning myself. I developed a queer fear of seeing my own form, as if my eyes would
find it something utterly alien and inconceivably abhorrent. When I did glance down and behold
the familiar human shape in quiet grey or blue clothing I always felt a curious relief, though
in order to gain this relief I had to conquer an infinite dread. I shunned mirrors as much as
possible, and was always shaved at the barber’s.
It was a long time before I correlated any of these disjointed feelings with
the fleeting visual impressions which began to develop. The first such correlation had to do
with the odd sensation of an external, artificial restraint on my memory. I felt that the snatches
of sight I experienced had a profound and terrible meaning, and a frightful connexion with myself,
but that some purposeful influence held me from grasping that meaning and that connexion. Then
came that queerness about the element of time, and with it desperate efforts to place
the fragmentary dream-glimpses in the chronological and spatial pattern.
The glimpses themselves were at first merely strange rather than horrible.
I would seem to be in an enormous vaulted chamber whose lofty stone groinings were well-nigh
lost in the shadows overhead. In whatever time or place the scene might be, the principle of
the arch was known as fully and used as extensively as by the Romans. There were colossal round
windows and high arched doors, and pedestals or tables each as tall as the height of an ordinary
room. Vast shelves of dark wood lined the walls, holding what seemed to be volumes of immense
size with strange hieroglyphs on their backs. The exposed stonework held curious carvings, always
in curvilinear mathematical designs, and there were chiselled inscriptions in the same characters
that the huge books bore. The dark granite masonry was of a monstrous megalithic type, with
lines of convex-topped blocks fitting the concave-bottomed courses which rested upon them. There
were no chairs, but the tops of the vast pedestals were littered with books, papers, and what
seemed to be writing materials—oddly figured jars of a purplish metal, and rods with stained
tips. Tall as the pedestals were, I seemed at times able to view them from above. On some of
them were great globes of luminous crystal serving as lamps, and inexplicable machines formed
of vitreous tubes and metal rods. The windows were glazed, and latticed with stout-looking bars.
Though I dared not approach and peer out them, I could see from where I was the waving tops
of singular fern-like growths. The floor was of massive octagonal flagstones, while rugs and
hangings were entirely lacking.
Later I had visions of sweeping through Cyclopean corridors of stone, and up
and down gigantic inclined planes of the same monstrous masonry. There were no stairs anywhere,
nor was any passageway less than thirty feet wide. Some of the structures through which I floated
must have towered into the sky for thousands of feet. There were multiple levels of black vaults
below, and never-opened trap-doors, sealed down with metal bands and holding dim suggestions
of some special peril. I seemed to be a prisoner, and horror hung broodingly over everything
I saw. I felt that the mocking curvilinear hieroglyphs on the walls would blast my soul with
their message were I not guarded by a merciful ignorance.
Still later my dreams included vistas from the great round windows, and from
the titanic flat roof, with its curious gardens, wide barren area, and high, scalloped parapet
of stone, to which the topmost of the inclined planes led. There were almost endless leagues
of giant buildings, each in its garden, and ranged along paved roads fully two hundred feet
wide. They differed greatly in aspect, but few were less than five hundred feet square or a
thousand feet high. Many seemed so limitless that they must have had a frontage of several thousand
feet, while some shot up to mountainous altitudes in the grey, steamy heavens. They seemed to
be mainly of stone or concrete, and most of them embodied the oddly curvilinear type of masonry
noticeable in the building that held me. Roofs were flat and garden-covered, and tended to have
scalloped parapets. Sometimes there were terraces and higher levels, and wide cleared spaces
amidst the gardens. The great roads held hints of motion, but in the earlier visions I could
not resolve this impression into details.
In certain places I beheld enormous dark cylindrical towers which climbed far
above any of the other structures. These appeared to be of a totally unique nature, and shewed
signs of prodigious age and dilapidation. They were built of a bizarre type of square-cut basalt
masonry, and tapered slightly toward their rounded tops. Nowhere in any of them could the least
traces of windows or other apertures save huge doors be found. I noticed also some lower buildings—all
crumbling with the weathering of aeons—which resembled these dark cylindrical towers in
basic architecture. Around all these aberrant piles of square-cut masonry there hovered an inexplicable
aura of menace and concentrated fear, like that bred by the sealed trap-doors.
The omnipresent gardens were almost terrifying in their strangeness, with bizarre
and unfamiliar forms of vegetation nodding over broad paths lined with curiously carven monoliths.
Abnormally vast fern-like growths predominated; some green, and some of a ghastly, fungoid pallor.
Among them rose great spectral things resembling calamites, whose bamboo-like trunks towered
to fabulous heights. Then there were tufted forms like fabulous cycads, and grotesque dark-green
shrubs and trees of coniferous aspect. Flowers were small, colourless, and unrecognisable, blooming
in geometrical beds and at large among the greenery. In a few of the terrace and roof-top gardens
were larger and more vivid blossoms of almost offensive contours and seeming to suggest artificial
breeding. Fungi of inconceivable size, outlines, and colours speckled the scene in patterns
bespeaking some unknown but well-established horticultural tradition. In the larger gardens
on the ground there seemed to be some attempt to preserve the irregularities of Nature, but
on the roofs there was more selectiveness, and more evidences of the topiary art.
The skies were almost always moist and cloudy, and sometimes I would seem to
witness tremendous rains. Once in a while, though, there would be glimpses of the sun—which
looked abnormally large—and of the moon, whose markings held a touch of difference from
the normal that I could never quite fathom. When—very rarely—the night sky was clear
to any extent, I beheld constellations which were nearly beyond recognition. Known outlines
were sometimes approximated, but seldom duplicated; and from the position of the few groups
I could recognise, I felt I must be in the earth’s southern hemisphere, near the Tropic
of Capricorn. The far horizon was always steamy and indistinct, but I could see that great jungles
of unknown tree-ferns, calamites, lepidodendra, and sigillaria lay outside the city, their fantastic
frondage waving mockingly in the shifting vapours. Now and then there would be suggestions of
motion in the sky, but these my early visions never resolved.
By the autumn of 1914 I began to have infrequent dreams of strange floatings
over the city and through the regions around it. I saw interminable roads through forests
of fearsome growths with mottled, fluted, and banded trunks, and past other cities as strange
as the one which persistently haunted me. I saw monstrous constructions of black or iridescent
stone in glades and clearings where perpetual twilight reigned, and traversed long causeways
over swamps so dark that I could tell but little of their moist, towering vegetation. Once I
saw an area of countless miles strown with age-blasted basaltic ruins whose architecture had
been like that of the few windowless, round-topped towers in the haunting city. And once I saw
the sea—a boundless steamy expanse beyond the colossal stone piers of an enormous town
of domes and arches. Great shapeless suggestions of shadow moved over it, and here and there
its surface was vexed with anomalous spoutings.
III.

As I have said, it was not immediately that these wild visions began to hold their terrifying
quality. Certainly, many persons have dreamed intrinsically stranger things—things compounded
of unrelated scraps of daily life, pictures, and reading, and arranged in fantastically novel
forms by the unchecked caprices of sleep. For some time I accepted the visions as natural, even
though I had never before been an extravagant dreamer. Many of the vague anomalies, I argued,
must have come from trivial sources too numerous to track down; while others seemed to reflect
a common text-book knowledge of the plants and other conditions of the primitive world of a
hundred and fifty million years ago—the world of the Permian or Triassic age. In the course
of some months, however, the element of terror did figure with accumulating force. This was
when the dreams began so unfailingly to have the aspect of memories, and when my mind
began to link them with my growing abstract disturbances—the feeling of mnemonic restraint,
the curious impressions regarding time, the sense of a loathsome exchange with my secondary
personality of 1908–13, and, considerably later, the inexplicable loathing of my own person.
As certain definite details began to enter the dreams, their horror increased
a thousandfold—until by October, 1915, I felt I must do something. It was then that I
began an intensive study of other cases of amnesia and visions, feeling that I might thereby
objectivise my trouble and shake clear of its emotional grip. However, as before mentioned,
the result was at first almost exactly opposite. It disturbed me vastly to find that my dreams
had been so closely duplicated; especially since some of the accounts were too early to admit
of any geological knowledge—and therefore of any idea of primitive landscapes—on
the subjects’ part. What is more, many of these accounts supplied very horrible details
and explanations in connexion with the visions of great buildings and jungle gardens—and
other things. The actual sights and vague impressions were bad enough, but what was hinted or
asserted by some of the other dreamers savoured of madness and blasphemy. Worst of all, my own
pseudo-memory was aroused to wilder dreams and hints of coming revelations. And yet most doctors
deemed my course, on the whole, an advisable one.
I studied psychology systematically, and under the prevailing stimulus my son
Wingate did the same—his studies leading eventually to his present professorship. In 1917
and 1918 I took special courses at Miskatonic. Meanwhile my examination of medical, historical,
and anthropological records became indefatigable; involving travels to distant libraries, and
finally including even a reading of the hideous books of forbidden elder lore in which my secondary
personality had been so disturbingly interested. Some of the latter were the actual copies I
had consulted in my altered state, and I was greatly disturbed by certain marginal notations
and ostensible corrections of the hideous text in a script and idiom which somehow seemed
oddly un-human.
These markings were mostly in the respective languages of the various books,
all of which the writer seemed to know with equal though obviously academic facility. One note
appended to von Junzt’s Unaussprechlichen Kulten, however, was alarmingly otherwise.
It consisted of certain curvilinear hieroglyphs in the same ink as that of the German corrections,
but following no recognised human pattern. And these hieroglyphs were closely and unmistakably
akin to the characters constantly met with in my dreams—characters whose meaning I would
sometimes momentarily fancy I knew or was just on the brink of recalling. To complete my black
confusion, my librarians assured me that, in view of previous examinations and records of consultation
of the volumes in question, all of these notations must have been made by myself in my secondary
state. This despite the fact that I was and still am ignorant of three of the languages involved.
Piecing together the scattered records, ancient and modern, anthropological
and medical, I found a fairly consistent mixture of myth and hallucination whose scope and wildness
left me utterly dazed. Only one thing consoled me—the fact that the myths were of such
early existence. What lost knowledge could have brought pictures of the Palaeozoic or Mesozoic
landscape into these primitive fables, I could not even guess, but the pictures had been there.
Thus, a basis existed for the formation of a fixed type of delusion. Cases of amnesia no doubt
created the general myth-pattern—but afterward the fanciful accretions of the myths must
have reacted on amnesia sufferers and coloured their pseudo-memories. I myself had read and
heard all the early tales during my memory lapse—my quest had amply proved that. Was it
not natural, then, for my subsequent dreams and emotional impressions to become coloured and
moulded by what my memory subtly held over from my secondary state? A few of the myths had significant
connexions with other cloudy legends of the pre-human world, especially those Hindoo tales involving
stupefying gulfs of time and forming part of the lore of modern theosophists.
Primal myth and modern delusion joined in their assumption that mankind is
only one—perhaps the least—of the highly evolved and dominant races of this planet’s
long and largely unknown career. Things of inconceivable shape, they implied, had reared towers
to the sky and delved into every secret of Nature before the first amphibian forbear of man
had crawled out of the hot sea three hundred million years ago. Some had come down from the
stars; a few were as old as the cosmos itself; others had arisen swiftly from terrene germs
as far behind the first germs of our life-cycle as those germs are behind ourselves. Spans of
thousands of millions of years, and linkages with other galaxies and universes, were freely
spoken of. Indeed, there was no such thing as time in its humanly accepted sense.
But most of the tales and impressions concerned a relatively late race, of
a queer and intricate shape resembling no life-form known to science, which had lived till only
fifty million years before the advent of man. This, they indicated, was the greatest race of
all; because it alone had conquered the secret of time. It had learned all things that ever
were known or ever would be known on the earth, through the power of its keener minds
to project themselves into the past and future, even through gulfs of millions of years, and
study the lore of every age. From the accomplishments of this race arose all legends of prophets,
including those in human mythology.
In its vast libraries were volumes of texts and pictures holding the whole
of earth’s annals—histories and descriptions of every species that had ever been
or that ever would be, with full records of their arts, their achievements, their languages,
and their psychologies. With this aeon-embracing knowledge, the Great Race chose from every
era and life-form such thoughts, arts, and processes as might suit its own nature and situation.
Knowledge of the past, secured through a kind of mind-casting outside the recognised senses,
was harder to glean than knowledge of the future.
In the latter case the course was easier and more material. With suitable mechanical
aid a mind would project itself forward in time, feeling its dim, extra-sensory way till it
approached the desired period. Then, after preliminary trials, it would seize on the best discoverable
representative of the highest of that period’s life-forms; entering the organism’s
brain and setting up therein its own vibrations while the displaced mind would strike back to
the period of the displacer, remaining in the latter’s body till a reverse process was
set up. The projected mind, in the body of the organism of the future, would then pose as a
member of the race whose outward form it wore; learning as quickly as possible all that could
be learned of the chosen age and its massed information and techniques.
Meanwhile the displaced mind, thrown back to the displacer’s age and
body, would be carefully guarded. It would be kept from harming the body it occupied, and would
be drained of all its knowledge by trained questioners. Often it could be questioned in its
own language, when previous quests into the future had brought back records of that language.
If the mind came from a body whose language the Great Race could not physically reproduce, clever
machines would be made, on which the alien speech could be played as on a musical instrument.
The Great Race’s members were immense rugose cones ten feet high, and with head and other
organs attached to foot-thick, distensible limbs spreading from the apexes. They spoke by the
clicking or scraping of huge paws or claws attached to the end of two of their four limbs, and
walked by the expansion and contraction of a viscous layer attached to their vast ten-foot bases.
When the captive mind’s amazement and resentment had worn off, and when
(assuming that it came from a body vastly different from the Great Race’s) it had lost
its horror at its unfamiliar temporary form, it was permitted to study its new environment and
experience a wonder and wisdom approximating that of its displacer. With suitable precautions,
and in exchange for suitable services, it was allowed to rove all over the habitable world in
titan airships or on the huge boat-like atomic-engined vehicles which traversed the great roads,
and to delve freely into the libraries containing the records of the planet’s past and
future. This reconciled many captive minds to their lot; since none were other than keen, and
to such minds the unveiling of hidden mysteries of earth—closed chapters of inconceivable
pasts and dizzying vortices of future time which include the years ahead of their own natural
ages—forms always, despite the abysmal horrors often unveiled, the supreme experience
of life.
Now and then certain captives were permitted to meet other captive minds seized
from the future—to exchange thoughts with consciousnesses living a hundred or a thousand
or a million years before or after their own ages. And all were urged to write copiously in
their own languages of themselves and their respective periods; such documents to be filed in
the great central archives.
It may be added that there was one sad special type of captive whose privileges
were far greater than those of the majority. These were the dying permanent exiles, whose
bodies in the future had been seized by keen-minded members of the Great Race who, faced with
death, sought to escape mental extinction. Such melancholy exiles were not as common as might
be expected, since the longevity of the Great Race lessened its love of life—especially
among those superior minds capable of projection. From cases of the permanent projection of
elder minds arose many of those lasting changes of personality noticed in later history—including
mankind’s.
As for the ordinary cases of exploration—when the displacing mind had
learned what it wished in the future, it would build an apparatus like that which had started
its flight and reverse the process of projection. Once more it would be in its own body in its
own age, while the lately captive mind would return to that body of the future to which it properly
belonged. Only when one or the other of the bodies had died during the exchange was this restoration
impossible. In such cases, of course, the exploring mind had—like those of the death-escapers—to
live out an alien-bodied life in the future; or else the captive mind—like the dying permanent
exiles—had to end its days in the form and past age of the Great Race.
This fate was least horrible when the captive mind was also of the Great Race—a
not infrequent occurrence, since in all its periods that race was intensely concerned with its
own future. The number of dying permanent exiles of the Great Race was very slight—largely
because of the tremendous penalties attached to displacements of future Great Race minds by
the moribund. Through projection, arrangements were made to inflict these penalties on the offending
minds in their new future bodies—and sometimes forced re-exchanges were effected. Complex
cases of the displacement of exploring or already captive minds by minds in various regions
of the past had been known and carefully rectified. In every age since the discovery of mind-projection,
a minute but well-recognised element of the population consisted of Great Race minds from past
ages, sojourning for a longer or shorter while.
When a captive mind of alien origin was returned to its own body in the future,
it was purged by an intricate mechanical hypnosis of all it had learned in the Great Race’s
age—this because of certain troublesome consequences inherent in the general carrying
forward of knowledge in large quantities. The few existing instances of clear transmission had
caused, and would cause at known future times, great disasters. And it was largely in consequence
of two cases of the kind (said the old myths) that mankind had learned what it had concerning
the Great Race. Of all things surviving physically and directly from that aeon-distant
world, there remained only certain ruins of great stones in far places and under the sea, and
parts of the text of the frightful Pnakotic Manuscripts.
Thus the returning mind reached its own age with only the faintest and most
fragmentary visions of what it had undergone since its seizure. All memories that could be eradicated
were eradicated, so that in most cases only a dream-shadowed blank stretched back to the time
of the first exchange. Some minds recalled more than others, and the chance joining of memories
had at rare times brought hints of the forbidden past to future ages. There probably never was
a time when groups or cults did not secretly cherish certain of these hints. In the Necronomicon
the presence of such a cult among human beings was suggested—a cult that sometimes gave
aid to minds voyaging down the aeons from the days of the Great Race.
And meanwhile the Great Race itself waxed well-nigh omniscient, and turned
to the task of setting up exchanges with the minds of other planets, and of exploring their
pasts and futures. It sought likewise to fathom the past years and origin of that black, aeon-dead
orb in far space whence its own mental heritage had come—for the mind of the Great Race
was older than its bodily form. The beings of a dying elder world, wise with the ultimate secrets,
had looked ahead for a new world and species wherein they might have long life; and had sent
their minds en masse into that future race best adapted to house them—the cone-shaped
things that peopled our earth a billion years ago. Thus the Great Race came to be, while the
myriad minds sent backward were left to die in the horror of strange shapes. Later the race
would again face death, yet would live through another forward migration of its best minds into
the bodies of others who had a longer physical span ahead of them.
Such was the background of intertwined legend and hallucination. When, around
1920, I had my researches in coherent shape, I felt a slight lessening of the tension which
their earlier stages had increased. After all, and in spite of the fancies prompted by blind
emotions, were not most of my phenomena readily explainable? Any chance might have turned my
mind to dark studies during the amnesia—and then I read the forbidden legends and met
the members of ancient and ill-regarded cults. That, plainly, supplied the material for the
dreams and disturbed feelings which came after the return of memory. As for the marginal notes
in dream-hieroglyphs and languages unknown to me, but laid at my door by librarians—I
might easily have picked up a smattering of the tongues during my secondary state, while the
hieroglyphs were doubtless coined by my fancy from descriptions in old legends, and afterward
woven into my dreams. I tried to verify certain points through conversation with known cult-leaders,
but never succeeded in establishing the right connexions.
At times the parallelism of so many cases in so many distant ages continued
to worry me as it had at first, but on the other hand I reflected that the excitant folklore
was undoubtedly more universal in the past than in the present. Probably all the other victims
whose cases were like mine had had a long and familiar knowledge of the tales I had learned
only when in my secondary state. When these victims had lost their memory, they had associated
themselves with the creatures of their household myths—the fabulous invaders supposed
to displace men’s minds—and had thus embarked upon quests for knowledge which they
thought they could take back to a fancied, non-human past. Then when their memory returned,
they reversed the associative process and thought of themselves as the former captive minds
instead of as the displacers. Hence the dreams and pseudo-memories following the conventional
myth-pattern.
Despite the seeming cumbrousness of these explanations, they came finally to
supersede all others in my mind—largely because of the greater weakness of any rival theory.
And a substantial number of eminent psychologists and anthropologists gradually agreed with
me. The more I reflected, the more convincing did my reasoning seem; till in the end I had a
really effective bulwark against the visions and impressions which still assailed me. Suppose
I did see strange things at night? These were only what I had heard and read of. Suppose I did
have odd loathings and perspectives and pseudo-memories? These, too, were only echoes of myths
absorbed in my secondary state. Nothing that I might dream, nothing that I might feel, could
be of any actual significance.
Fortified by this philosophy, I greatly improved in nervous equilibrium, even
though the visions (rather than the abstract impressions) steadily became more frequent and
more disturbingly detailed. In 1922 I felt able to undertake regular work again, and put my
newly gained knowledge to practical use by accepting an instructorship in psychology at the
university. My old chair of political economy had long been adequately filled—besides
which, methods of teaching economics had changed greatly since my heyday. My son was at this
time just entering on the post-graduate studies leading to his present professorship, and we
worked together a great deal.
IV.

I continued, however, to keep a careful record of the outré dreams which crowded upon
me so thickly and vividly. Such a record, I argued, was of genuine value as a psychological
document. The glimpses still seemed damnably like memories, though I fought off this
impression with a goodly measure of success. In writing, I treated the phantasmata as things
seen; but at all other times I brushed them aside like any gossamer illusions of the night.
I had never mentioned such matters in common conversation; though reports of them, filtering
out as such things will, had aroused sundry rumours regarding my mental health. It is amusing
to reflect that these rumours were confined wholly to laymen, without a single champion among
physicians or psychologists.
Of my visions after 1914 I will here mention only a few, since fuller accounts
and records are at the disposal of the serious student. It is evident that with time the curious
inhibitions somewhat waned, for the scope of my visions vastly increased. They have never, though,
become other than disjointed fragments seemingly without clear motivation. Within the dreams
I seemed gradually to acquire a greater and greater freedom of wandering. I floated through
many strange buildings of stone, going from one to the other along mammoth underground passages
which seemed to form the common avenues of transit. Sometimes I encountered those gigantic sealed
trap-doors in the lowest level, around which such an aura of fear and forbiddenness clung. I
saw tremendous tessellated pools, and rooms of curious and inexplicable utensils of myriad sorts.
Then there were colossal caverns of intricate machinery whose outlines and purpose were wholly
strange to me, and whose sound manifested itself only after many years of dreaming. I
may here remark that sight and sound are the only senses I have ever exercised in the visionary
world.
The real horror began in May, 1915, when I first saw the living things.
This was before my studies had taught me what, in view of the myths and case histories, to expect.
As mental barriers wore down, I beheld great masses of thin vapour in various parts of the building
and in the streets below. These steadily grew more solid and distinct, till at last I could
trace their monstrous outlines with uncomfortable ease. They seemed to be enormous iridescent
cones, about ten feet high and ten feet wide at the base, and made up of some ridgy, scaly,
semi-elastic matter. From their apexes projected four flexible, cylindrical members, each a
foot thick, and of a ridgy substance like that of the cones themselves. These members were sometimes
contracted almost to nothing, and sometimes extended to any distance up to about ten feet. Terminating
two of them were enormous claws or nippers. At the end of a third were four red, trumpet-like
appendages. The fourth terminated in an irregular yellowish globe some two feet in diameter
and having three great dark eyes ranged along its central circumference. Surmounting this head
were four slender grey stalks bearing flower-like appendages, whilst from its nether side dangled
eight greenish antennae or tentacles. The great base of the central cone was fringed with a
rubbery, grey substance which moved the whole entity through expansion and contraction.
Their actions, though harmless, horrified me even more than their appearance—for
it is not wholesome to watch monstrous objects doing what one has known only human beings to
do. These objects moved intelligently around the great rooms, getting books from the shelves
and taking them to the great tables, or vice versa, and sometimes writing diligently with a
penlike rod gripped in the greenish head-tentacles. The huge nippers were used in carrying
books and in conversation—speech consisting of a kind of clicking and scraping. The objects
had no clothing, but wore satchels or knapsacks suspended from the top of the conical trunk.
They commonly carried their head and its supporting member at the level of the cone top, although
it was frequently raised or lowered. The other three great members tended to rest downward on
the sides of the cone, contracted to about five feet each, when not in use. From their rate
of reading, writing, and operating their machines (those on the tables seemed somehow connected
with thought) I concluded that their intelligence was enormously greater than man’s.
Afterward I saw them everywhere; swarming in all the great chambers and corridors,
tending monstrous machines in vaulted crypts, and racing along the vast roads in gigantic boat-shaped
cars. I ceased to be afraid of them, for they seemed to form supremely natural parts of their
environment. Individual differences amongst them began to be manifest, and a few appeared to
be under some kind of restraint. These latter, though shewing no physical variation, had a diversity
of gestures and habits which marked them off not only from the majority, but very largely from
one another. They wrote a great deal in what seemed to my cloudy vision a vast variety of characters—never
the typical curvilinear hieroglyphs of the majority. A few, I fancied, used our own familiar
alphabet. Most of them worked much more slowly than the general mass of the entities.
All this time my own part in the dreams seemed to be that of a disembodied
consciousness with a range of vision wider than the normal; floating freely about, yet confined
to the ordinary avenues and speeds of travel. Not until August, 1915, did any suggestions of
bodily existence begin to harass me. I say harass, because the first phase was a purely
abstract though infinitely terrible association of my previously noted body-loathing with the
scenes of my visions. For a while my chief concern during dreams was to avoid looking down at
myself, and I recall how grateful I was for the total absence of large mirrors in the strange
rooms. I was mightily troubled by the fact that I always saw the great tables—whose height
could not be under ten feet—from a level not below that of their surfaces.
And then the morbid temptation to look down at myself became greater and greater,
till one night I could not resist it. At first my downward glance revealed nothing whatever.
A moment later I perceived that this was because my head lay at the end of a flexible neck of
enormous length. Retracting this neck and gazing down very sharply, I saw the scaly, rugose,
iridescent bulk of a vast cone ten feet tall and ten feet wide at the base. That was when I
waked half of Arkham with my screaming as I plunged madly up from the abyss of sleep.
Only after weeks of hideous repetition did I grow half-reconciled to these
visions of myself in monstrous form. In the dreams I now moved bodily among the other unknown
entities, reading terrible books from the endless shelves and writing for hours at the great
tables with a stylus managed by the green tentacles that hung down from my head. Snatches of
what I read and wrote would linger in my memory. There were horrible annals of other worlds
and other universes, and of stirrings of formless life outside of all universes. There were
records of strange orders of beings which had peopled the world in forgotten pasts, and frightful
chronicles of grotesque-bodied intelligences which would people it millions of years after the
death of the last human being. And I learned of chapters in human history whose existence no
scholar of today has ever suspected. Most of these writings were in the language of the hieroglyphs;
which I studied in a queer way with the aid of droning machines, and which was evidently an
agglutinative speech with root systems utterly unlike any found in human languages. Other volumes
were in other unknown tongues learned in the same queer way. A very few were in languages I
knew. Extremely clever pictures, both inserted in the records and forming separate collections,
aided me immensely. And all the time I seemed to be setting down a history of my own age in
English. On waking, I could recall only minute and meaningless scraps of the unknown tongues
which my dream-self had mastered, though whole phrases of the history stayed with me.
I learned—even before my waking self had studied the parallel cases or
the old myths from which the dreams doubtless sprang—that the entities around me were
of the world’s greatest race, which had conquered time and had sent exploring minds into
every age. I knew, too, that I had been snatched from my age while another used my body
in that age, and that a few of the other strange forms housed similarly captured minds. I seemed
to talk, in some odd language of claw-clickings, with exiled intellects from every corner of
the solar system.
There was a mind from the planet we know as Venus, which would live incalculable
epochs to come, and one from an outer moon of Jupiter six million years in the past. Of earthly
minds there were some from the winged, star-headed, half-vegetable race of palaeogean Antarctica;
one from the reptile people of fabled Valusia; three from the furry pre-human Hyperborean worshippers
of Tsathoggua; one from the wholly abominable Tcho-Tchos; two from the arachnid denizens of
earth’s last age; five from the hardy coleopterous species immediately following mankind,
to which the Great Race was some day to transfer its keenest minds en masse in the face of horrible
peril; and several from different branches of humanity.
I talked with the mind of Yiang-Li, a philosopher from the cruel empire of
Tsan-Chan, which is to come in A.D. 5000; with that of a general of the great-headed brown people
who held South Africa in B.C. 50,000; with that of a twelfth-century Florentine monk named Bartolomeo
Corsi; with that of a king of Lomar who had ruled that terrible polar land 100,000 years before
the squat, yellow Inutos came from the west to engulf it; with that of Nug-Soth, a magician
of the dark conquerors of A.D. 16,000; with that of a Roman named Titus Sempronius Blaesus,
who had been a quaestor in Sulla’s time; with that of Khephnes, an Egyptian of the 14th
Dynasty who told me the hideous secret of Nyarlathotep; with that of a priest of Atlantis’
middle kingdom; with that of a Suffolk gentleman of Cromwell’s day, James Woodville; with
that of a court astronomer of pre-Inca Peru; with that of the Australian physicist Nevil Kingston-Brown,
who will die in A.D. 2518; with that of an archimage of vanished Yhe in the Pacific; with that
of Theodotides, a Graeco-Bactrian official of B.C. 200; with that of an aged Frenchman of Louis
XIII’s time named Pierre-Louis Montmagny; with that of Crom-Ya, a Cimmerian chieftain
of B.C. 15,000; and with so many others that my brain cannot hold the shocking secrets and dizzying
marvels I learned from them.
I awaked each morning in a fever, sometimes frantically trying to verify or
discredit such information as fell within the range of modern human knowledge. Traditional facts
took on new and doubtful aspects, and I marvelled at the dream-fancy which could invent such
surprising addenda to history and science. I shivered at the mysteries the past may conceal,
and trembled at the menaces the future may bring forth. What was hinted in the speech of post-human
entities of the fate of mankind produced such an effect on me that I will not set it down here.
After man there would be the mighty beetle civilisation, the bodies of whose members the cream
of the Great Race would seize when the monstrous doom overtook the elder world. Later, as the
earth’s span closed, the transferred minds would again migrate through time and space—to
another stopping-place in the bodies of the bulbous vegetable entities of Mercury. But there
would be races after them, clinging pathetically to the cold planet and burrowing to its horror-filled
core, before the utter end.
Meanwhile, in my dreams, I wrote endlessly in that history of my own age which
I was preparing—half voluntarily and half through promises of increased library and travel
opportunities—for the Great Race’s central archives. The archives were in a colossal
subterranean structure near the city’s centre, which I came to know well through frequent
labours and consultations. Meant to last as long as the race, and to withstand the fiercest
of earth’s convulsions, this titan repository surpassed all other buildings in the massive,
mountain-like firmness of its construction.
The records, written or printed on great sheets of a curiously tenacious cellulose
fabric, were bound into books that opened from the top, and were kept in individual cases of
a strange, extremely light rustless metal of greyish hue, decorated with mathematical designs
and bearing the title in the Great Race’s curvilinear hieroglyphs. These cases were stored
in tiers of rectangular vaults—like closed, locked shelves—wrought of the same rustless
metal and fastened by knobs with intricate turnings. My own history was assigned a specific
place in the vaults of the lowest or vertebrate level—the section devoted to the culture
of mankind and of the furry and reptilian races immediately preceding it in terrestrial dominance.
But none of the dreams ever gave me a full picture of daily life. All were
the merest misty, disconnected fragments, and it is certain that these fragments were not unfolded
in their rightful sequence. I have, for example, a very imperfect idea of my own living arrangements
in the dream-world; though I seem to have possessed a great stone room of my own. My restrictions
as a prisoner gradually disappeared, so that some of the visions included vivid travels over
the mighty jungle roads, sojourns in strange cities, and explorations of some of the vast dark
windowless ruins from which the Great Race shrank in curious fear. There were also long sea-voyages
in enormous, many-decked boats of incredible swiftness, and trips over wild regions in closed,
projectile-like airships lifted and moved by electrical repulsion. Beyond the wide, warm ocean
were other cities of the Great Race, and on one far continent I saw the crude villages of the
black-snouted, winged creatures who would evolve as a dominant stock after the Great Race had
sent its foremost minds into the future to escape the creeping horror. Flatness and exuberant
green life were always the keynote of the scene. Hills were low and sparse, and usually displayed
signs of volcanic forces.
Of the animals I saw, I could write volumes. All were wild; for the Great Race’s
mechanised culture had long since done away with domestic beasts, while food was wholly vegetable
or synthetic. Clumsy reptiles of great bulk floundered in steaming morasses, fluttered in the
heavy air, or spouted in the seas and lakes; and among these I fancied I could vaguely recognise
lesser, archaic prototypes of many forms—dinosaurs, pterodactyls, ichthyosaurs, labyrinthodonts,
rhamphorhynci, plesiosaurs, and the like—made familiar through palaeontology. Of birds
or mammals there were none that I could discern.
The ground and swamps were constantly alive with snakes, lizards, and crocodiles,
while insects buzzed incessantly amidst the lush vegetation. And far out at sea unspied and
unknown monsters spouted mountainous columns of foam into the vaporous sky. Once I was taken
under the ocean in a gigantic submarine vessel with searchlights, and glimpsed some living horrors
of awesome magnitude. I saw also the ruins of incredible sunken cities, and the wealth of crinoid,
brachiopod, coral, and ichthyic life which everywhere abounded.
Of the physiology, psychology, folkways, and detailed history of the Great
Race my visions preserved but little information, and many of the scattered points I here set
down were gleaned from my study of old legends and other cases rather than from my own dreaming.
For in time, of course, my reading and research caught up with and passed the dreams in many
phases; so that certain dream-fragments were explained in advance, and formed verifications
of what I had learned. This consolingly established my belief that similar reading and research,
accomplished by my secondary self, had formed the source of the whole terrible fabric of pseudo-memories.
The period of my dreams, apparently, was one somewhat less than 150,000,000
years ago, when the Palaeozoic age was giving place to the Mesozoic. The bodies occupied by
the Great Race represented no surviving—or even scientifically known—line of terrestrial
evolution, but were of a peculiar, closely homogeneous, and highly specialised organic type
inclining as much to the vegetable as to the animal state. Cell-action was of an unique sort
almost precluding fatigue, and wholly eliminating the need of sleep. Nourishment, assimilated
through the red trumpet-like appendages on one of the great flexible limbs, was always semi-fluid
and in many aspects wholly unlike the food of existing animals. The beings had but two of the
senses which we recognise—sight and hearing, the latter accomplished through the flower-like
appendages on the grey stalks above their heads—but of other and incomprehensible senses
(not, however, well utilisable by alien captive minds inhabiting their bodies) they possessed
many. Their three eyes were so situated as to give them a range of vision wider than the normal.
Their blood was a sort of deep-greenish ichor of great thickness. They had no sex, but reproduced
through seeds or spores which clustered on their bases and could be developed only under water.
Great, shallow tanks were used for the growth of their young—which were, however, reared
only in small numbers on account of the longevity of individuals; four or five thousand years
being the common life span.
Markedly defective individuals were quietly disposed of as soon as their defects
were noticed. Disease and the approach of death were, in the absence of a sense of touch or
of physical pain, recognised by purely visual symptoms. The dead were incinerated with dignified
ceremonies. Once in a while, as before mentioned, a keen mind would escape death by forward
projection in time; but such cases were not numerous. When one did occur, the exiled mind from
the future was treated with the utmost kindness till the dissolution of its unfamiliar tenement.
The Great Race seemed to form a single loosely knit nation or league, with
major institutions in common, though there were four definite divisions. The political and economic
system of each unit was a sort of fascistic socialism, with major resources rationally distributed,
and power delegated to a small governing board elected by the votes of all able to pass certain
educational and psychological tests. Family organisation was not overstressed, though ties among
persons of common descent were recognised, and the young were generally reared by their parents.
Resemblances to human attitudes and institutions were, of course, most marked
in those fields where on the one hand highly abstract elements were concerned, or where on the
other hand there was a dominance of the basic, unspecialised urges common to all organic life.
A few added likenesses came through conscious adoption as the Great Race probed the future and
copied what it liked. Industry, highly mechanised, demanded but little time from each citizen;
and the abundant leisure was filled with intellectual and aesthetic activities of various sorts.
The sciences were carried to an unbelievable height of development, and art was a vital part
of life, though at the period of my dreams it had passed its crest and meridian. Technology
was enormously stimulated through the constant struggle to survive, and to keep in existence
the physical fabric of great cities, imposed by the prodigious geologic upheavals of those primal
days.
Crime was surprisingly scanty, and was dealt with through highly efficient
policing. Punishments ranged from privilege-deprivation and imprisonment to death or major emotion-wrenching,
and were never administered without a careful study of the criminal’s motivations. Warfare,
largely civil for the last few millennia though sometimes waged against reptilian and octopodic
invaders, or against the winged, star-headed Old Ones who centred in the Antarctic, was infrequent
though infinitely devastating. An enormous army, using camera-like weapons which produced tremendous
electrical effects, was kept on hand for purposes seldom mentioned, but obviously connected
with the ceaseless fear of the dark, windowless elder ruins and of the great sealed trap-doors
in the lowest subterrene levels.
This fear of the basalt ruins and trap-doors was largely a matter of unspoken
suggestion—or, at most, of furtive quasi-whispers. Everything specific which bore on it
was significantly absent from such books as were on the common shelves. It was the one subject
lying altogether under a taboo among the Great Race, and seemed to be connected alike with horrible
bygone struggles, and with that future peril which would some day force the race to send its
keener minds ahead en masse in time. Imperfect and fragmentary as were the other things presented
by dreams and legends, this matter was still more bafflingly shrouded. The vague old myths avoided
it—or perhaps all allusions had for some reason been excised. And in the dreams of myself
and others, the hints were peculiarly few. Members of the Great Race never intentionally referred
to the matter, and what could be gleaned came only from some of the more sharply observant captive
minds.
According to these scraps of information, the basis of the fear was a horrible
elder race of half-polypous, utterly alien entities which had come through space from immeasurably
distant universes and had dominated the earth and three other solar planets about six hundred
million years ago. They were only partly material—as we understand matter—and their
type of consciousness and media of perception differed wholly from those of terrestrial organisms.
For example, their senses did not include that of sight; their mental world being a strange,
non-visual pattern of impressions. They were, however, sufficiently material to use implements
of normal matter when in cosmic areas containing it; and they required housing—albeit
of a peculiar kind. Though their senses could penetrate all material barriers, their
substance could not; and certain forms of electrical energy could wholly destroy them.
They had the power of aërial motion despite the absence of wings or any other visible means
of levitation. Their minds were of such texture that no exchange with them could be effected
by the Great Race.
When these things had come to the earth they had built mighty basalt cities
of windowless towers, and had preyed horribly upon the beings they found. Thus it was when the
minds of the Great Race sped across the void from that obscure trans-galactic world known in
the disturbing and debatable Eltdown Shards as Yith. The newcomers, with the instruments they
created, had found it easy to subdue the predatory entities and drive them down to those caverns
of inner earth which they had already joined to their abodes and begun to inhabit. Then they
had sealed the entrances and left them to their fate, afterward occupying most of their great
cities and preserving certain important buildings for reasons connected more with superstition
than with indifference, boldness, or scientific and historical zeal.
But as the aeons passed, there came vague, evil signs that the Elder Things
were growing strong and numerous in the inner world. There were sporadic irruptions of a particularly
hideous character in certain small and remote cities of the Great Race, and in some of the deserted
elder cities which the Great Race had not peopled—places where the paths to the gulfs
below had not been properly sealed or guarded. After that greater precautions were taken, and
many of the paths were closed for ever—though a few were left with sealed trap-doors for
strategic use in fighting the Elder Things if ever they broke forth in unexpected places; fresh
rifts caused by that selfsame geologic change which had choked some of the paths and had slowly
lessened the number of outer-world structures and ruins surviving from the conquered entities.
The irruptions of the Elder Things must have been shocking beyond all description,
since they had permanently coloured the psychology of the Great Race. Such was the fixed mood
of horror that the very aspect of the creatures was left unmentioned—at no time
was I able to gain a clear hint of what they looked like. There were veiled suggestions of a
monstrous plasticity, and of temporary lapses of visibility, while other fragmentary
whispers referred to their control and military use of great winds. Singular whistling
noises, and colossal footprints made up of five circular toe-marks, seemed also to be associated
with them.
It was evident that the coming doom so desperately feared by the Great Race—the
doom that was one day to send millions of keen minds across the chasm of time to strange bodies
in the safer future—had to do with a final successful irruption of the Elder Beings. Mental
projections down the ages had clearly foretold such a horror, and the Great Race had resolved
that none who could escape should face it. That the foray would be a matter of vengeance, rather
than an attempt to reoccupy the outer world, they knew from the planet’s later history—for
their projections shewed the coming and going of subsequent races untroubled by the monstrous
entities. Perhaps these entities had come to prefer earth’s inner abysses to the variable,
storm-ravaged surface, since light meant nothing to them. Perhaps, too, they were slowly weakening
with the aeons. Indeed, it was known that they would be quite dead in the time of the post-human
beetle race which the fleeing minds would tenant. Meanwhile the Great Race maintained its cautious
vigilance, with potent weapons ceaselessly ready despite the horrified banishing of the subject
from common speech and visible records. And always the shadow of nameless fear hung about the
sealed trap-doors and the dark, windowless elder towers.
V.

That is the world of which my dreams brought me dim, scattered echoes every night. I cannot
hope to give any true idea of the horror and dread contained in such echoes, for it was upon
a wholly intangible quality—the sharp sense of pseudo-memory—that such feelings
mainly depended. As I have said, my studies gradually gave me a defence against these feelings,
in the form of rational psychological explanations; and this saving influence was augmented
by the subtle touch of accustomedness which comes with the passage of time. Yet in spite of
everything the vague, creeping terror would return momentarily now and then. It did not, however,
engulf me as it had before; and after 1922 I lived a very normal life of work and recreation.
In the course of years I began to feel that my experience—together with
the kindred cases and the related folklore—ought to be definitely summarised and published
for the benefit of serious students; hence I prepared a series of articles briefly covering
the whole ground and illustrated with crude sketches of some of the shapes, scenes, decorative
motifs, and hieroglyphs remembered from the dreams. These appeared at various times during 1928
and 1929 in the Journal of the American Psychological Society, but did not attract much
attention. Meanwhile I continued to record my dreams with the minutest care, even though the
growing stack of reports attained troublesomely vast proportions.
On July 10, 1934, there was forwarded to me by the Psychological Society the
letter which opened the culminating and most horrible phase of the whole mad ordeal. It was
postmarked Pilbarra, Western Australia, and bore the signature of one whom I found, upon inquiry,
to be a mining engineer of considerable prominence. Enclosed were some very curious snapshots.
I will reproduce the text in its entirety, and no reader can fail to understand how tremendous
an effect it and the photographs had upon me.
I was, for a time, almost stunned and incredulous; for although I had often
thought that some basis of fact must underlie certain phases of the legends which had coloured
my dreams, I was none the less unprepared for anything like a tangible survival from a lost
world remote beyond all imagination. Most devastating of all were the photographs—for
here, in cold, incontrovertible realism, there stood out against a background of sand certain
worn-down, water-ridged, storm-weathered blocks of stone whose slightly convex tops and slightly
concave bottoms told their own story. And when I studied them with a magnifying glass I could
see all too plainly, amidst the batterings and pittings, the traces of those vast curvilinear
designs and occasional hieroglyphs whose significance had become so hideous to me. But here
is the letter, which speaks for itself:
49,
Dampier Str.,Pilbarra, W. Australia,18
May, 1934.

Prof. N. W. Peaslee,
c/o Am. Psychological Society,
30, E. 41st Str.,
N. Y. City, U.S.A.

My dear Sir:—
A recent conversation with Dr. E. M. Boyle of Perth, and some papers with your
articles which he has just sent me, make it advisable for me to tell you about certain things
I have seen in the Great Sandy Desert east of our gold field here. It would seem, in view of
the peculiar legends about old cities with huge stonework and strange designs and hieroglyphs
which you describe, that I have come upon something very important.
The blackfellows have always been full of talk about “great stones with
marks on them”, and seem to have a terrible fear of such things. They connect them in
some way with their common racial legends about Buddai, the gigantic old man who lies asleep
for ages underground with his head on his arm, and who will some day awake and eat up the world.
There are some very old and half-forgotten tales of enormous underground huts of great stones,
where passages lead down and down, and where horrible things have happened. The blackfellows
claim that once some warriors, fleeing in battle, went down into one and never came back, but
that frightful winds began to blow from the place soon after they went down. However, there
usually isn’t much in what these natives say.
But what I have to tell is more than this. Two years ago, when I was prospecting
about 500 miles east in the desert, I came on a lot of queer pieces of dressed stone perhaps
3 × 2 × 2 feet in size, and weathered and pitted to the very limit. At first I couldn’t
find any of the marks the blackfellows told about, but when I looked close enough I could make
out some deeply carved lines in spite of the weathering. They were peculiar curves, just like
what the blacks had tried to describe. I imagine there must have been 30 or 40 blocks, some
nearly buried in the sand, and all within a circle perhaps a quarter of a mile’s diameter.
When I saw some, I looked around closely for more, and made a careful reckoning
of the place with my instruments. I also took pictures of 10 or 12 of the most typical blocks,
and will enclose the prints for you to see. I turned my information and pictures over to the
government at Perth, but they have done nothing with them. Then I met Dr. Boyle, who had read
your articles in the Journal of the American Psychological Society, and in time happened
to mention the stones. He was enormously interested, and became quite excited when I shewed
him my snapshots, saying that the stones and markings were just like those of the masonry you
had dreamed about and seen described in legends. He meant to write you, but was delayed. Meanwhile
he sent me most of the magazines with your articles, and I saw at once from your drawings and
descriptions that my stones are certainly the kind you mean. You can appreciate this from the
enclosed prints. Later on you will hear directly from Dr. Boyle.
Now I can understand how important all this will be to you. Without question
we are faced with the remains of an unknown civilisation older than any dreamed of before, and
forming a basis for your legends. As a mining engineer, I have some knowledge of geology, and
can tell you that these blocks are so ancient they frighten me. They are mostly sandstone and
granite, though one is almost certainly made of a queer sort of cement or concrete.
They bear evidence of water action, as if this part of the world had been submerged and come
up again after long ages—all since these blocks were made and used. It is a matter of
hundreds of thousands of years—or heaven knows how much more. I don’t like to think
about it.
In view of your previous diligent work in tracking down the legends and everything
connected with them, I cannot doubt but that you will want to lead an expedition to the desert
and make some archaeological excavations. Both Dr. Boyle and I are prepared to coöperate
in such work if you—or organisations known to you—can furnish the funds. I can get
together a dozen miners for the heavy digging—the blacks would be of no use, for I’ve
found that they have an almost maniacal fear of this particular spot. Boyle and I are saying
nothing to others, for you very obviously ought to have precedence in any discoveries or credit.
The place can be reached from Pilbarra in about 4 days by motor tractor—which
we’d need for our apparatus. It is somewhat west and south of Warburton’s path of
1873, and 100 miles southeast of Joanna Spring. We could float things up the De Grey River instead
of starting from Pilbarra—but all that can be talked over later. Roughly, the stones lie
at a point about 22° 3′ 14″ South Latitude, 125° 0′ 39″ East
Longitude. The climate is tropical, and the desert conditions are trying. Any expedition had better
be made in winter—June or July or August. I shall welcome further correspondence upon this
subject, and am keenly eager to assist in any plan you may devise. After studying your articles I
am deeply impressed with the profound significance of the whole matter. Dr. Boyle will write later.
When rapid communication is needed, a cable to Perth can be relayed by wireless.
Hoping profoundly for an early message,
Believe
me,Most faithfully yours,Robert B. F.
Mackenzie.
Of the immediate aftermath of this letter, much can be learned from the press.
My good fortune in securing the backing of Miskatonic University was great, and both Mr. Mackenzie
and Dr. Boyle proved invaluable in arranging matters at the Australian end. We were not too
specific with the public about our objects, since the whole matter would have lent itself unpleasantly
to sensational and jocose treatment by the cheaper newspapers. As a result, printed reports
were sparing; but enough appeared to tell of our quest for reported Australian ruins and to
chronicle our various preparatory steps.
Professors William Dyer of the college’s geology department (leader of
the Miskatonic Antarctic Expedition of 1930–31), Ferdinand C. Ashley of the department
of ancient history, and Tyler M. Freeborn of the department of anthropology—together with
my son Wingate—accompanied me. My correspondent Mackenzie came to Arkham early in 1935
and assisted in our final preparations. He proved to be a tremendously competent and affable
man of about fifty, admirably well-read, and deeply familiar with all the conditions of Australian
travel. He had tractors waiting at Pilbarra, and we chartered a tramp steamer of sufficiently
light draught to get up the river to that point. We were prepared to excavate in the most careful
and scientific fashion, sifting every particle of sand, and disturbing nothing which might seem
to be in or near its original situation.
Sailing from Boston aboard the wheezy Lexington on March 28, 1935, we
had a leisurely trip across the Atlantic and Mediterranean, through the Suez Canal, down the
Red Sea, and across the Indian Ocean to our goal. I need not tell how the sight of the low,
sandy West Australian coast depressed me, and how I detested the crude mining town and dreary
gold fields where the tractors were given their last loads. Dr. Boyle, who met us, proved to
be elderly, pleasant, and intelligent—and his knowledge of psychology led him into many
long discussions with my son and me.
Discomfort and expectancy were oddly mingled in most of us when at length our
party of eighteen rattled forth over the arid leagues of sand and rock. On Friday, May 31st,
we forded a branch of the De Grey and entered the realm of utter desolation. A certain positive
terror grew on me as we advanced to this actual site of the elder world behind the legends—a
terror of course abetted by the fact that my disturbing dreams and pseudo-memories still beset
me with unabated force.
It was on Monday, June 3, that we saw the first of the half-buried blocks.
I cannot describe the emotions with which I actually touched—in objective reality—a
fragment of Cyclopean masonry in every respect like the blocks in the walls of my dream-buildings.
There was a distinct trace of carving—and my hands trembled as I recognised part of a
curvilinear decorative scheme made hellish to me through years of tormenting nightmare and baffling
research.
A month of digging brought a total of some 1250 blocks in varying stages of
wear and disintegration. Most of these were carven megaliths with curved tops and bottoms. A
minority were smaller, flatter, plain-surfaced, and square or octagonally cut—like those
of the floors and pavements in my dreams—while a few were singularly massive and curved
or slanted in such a manner as to suggest use in vaulting or groining, or as parts of arches
or round window casings. The deeper—and the farther north and east—we dug, the more
blocks we found; though we still failed to discover any trace of arrangement among them. Professor
Dyer was appalled at the measureless age of the fragments, and Freeborn found traces of symbols
which fitted darkly into certain Papuan and Polynesian legends of infinite antiquity. The condition
and scattering of the blocks told mutely of vertiginous cycles of time and geologic upheavals
of cosmic savagery.
We had an aëroplane with us, and my son Wingate would often go up to different
heights and scan the sand-and-rock waste for signs of dim, large-scale outlines—either
differences of level or trails of scattered blocks. His results were virtually negative; for
whenever he would one day think he had glimpsed some significant trend, he would on his next
trip find the impression replaced by another equally insubstantial—a result of the shifting,
wind-blown sand. One or two of these ephemeral suggestions, though, affected me queerly and
disagreeably. They seemed, after a fashion, to dovetail horribly with something which I had
dreamed or read, but which I could no longer remember. There was a terrible pseudo-familiarity
about them—which somehow made me look furtively and apprehensively over the abominable,
sterile terrain toward the north and northeast.
Around the first week in July I developed an unaccountable set of mixed emotions
about that general northeasterly region. There was horror, and there was curiosity—but
more than that, there was a persistent and perplexing illusion of memory. I tried all
sorts of psychological expedients to get these notions out of my head, but met with no success.
Sleeplessness also gained upon me, but I almost welcomed this because of the resultant shortening
of my dream-periods. I acquired the habit of taking long, lone walks in the desert late at night—usually
to the north or northeast, whither the sum of my strange new impulses seemed subtly to pull
me.
Sometimes, on these walks, I would stumble over nearly buried fragments of
the ancient masonry. Though there were fewer visible blocks here than where we had started,
I felt sure that there must be a vast abundance beneath the surface. The ground was less level
than at our camp, and the prevailing high winds now and then piled the sand into fantastic temporary
hillocks—exposing some traces of the elder stones while it covered other traces. I was
queerly anxious to have the excavations extend to this territory, yet at the same time dreaded
what might be revealed. Obviously, I was getting into a rather bad state—all the worse
because I could not account for it.
An indication of my poor nervous health can be gained from my response to an
odd discovery which I made on one of my nocturnal rambles. It was on the evening of July 11th,
when a gibbous moon flooded the mysterious hillocks with a curious pallor. Wandering somewhat
beyond my usual limits, I came upon a great stone which seemed to differ markedly from any we
had yet encountered. It was almost wholly covered, but I stooped and cleared away the sand with
my hands, later studying the object carefully and supplementing the moonlight with my electric
torch. Unlike the other very large rocks, this one was perfectly square-cut, with no convex
or concave surface. It seemed, too, to be of a dark basaltic substance wholly dissimilar to
the granite and sandstone and occasional concrete of the now familiar fragments.
Suddenly I rose, turned, and ran for the camp at top speed. It was a wholly
unconscious and irrational flight, and only when I was close to my tent did I fully realise
why I had run. Then it came to me. The queer dark stone was something which I had dreamed and
read about, and which was linked with the uttermost horrors of the aeon-old legendry. It was
one of the blocks of that basaltic elder masonry which the fabled Great Race held in such fear—the
tall, windowless ruins left by those brooding, half-material, alien Things that festered in
earth’s nether abysses and against whose wind-like, invisible forces the trap-doors were
sealed and the sleepless sentinels posted.
I remained awake all that night, but by dawn realised how silly I had been
to let the shadow of a myth upset me. Instead of being frightened, I should have had a discoverer’s
enthusiasm. The next forenoon I told the others about my find, and Dyer, Freeborn, Boyle, my
son, and I set out to view the anomalous block. Failure, however, confronted us. I had formed
no clear idea of the stone’s location, and a late wind had wholly altered the hillocks
of shifting sand.
VI.

I come now to the crucial and most difficult part of my narrative—all the more difficult
because I cannot be quite certain of its reality. At times I feel uncomfortably sure that I
was not dreaming or deluded; and it is this feeling—in view of the stupendous implications
which the objective truth of my experience would raise—which impels me to make this record.
My son—a trained psychologist with the fullest and most sympathetic knowledge of my whole
case—shall be the primary judge of what I have to tell.
First let me outline the externals of the matter, as those at the camp know
them. On the night of July 17–18, after a windy day, I retired early but could not sleep.
Rising shortly before eleven, and afflicted as usual with that strange feeling regarding the
northeastward terrain, I set out on one of my typical nocturnal walks; seeing and greeting only
one person—an Australian miner named Tupper—as I left our precincts. The moon, slightly
past full, shone from a clear sky and drenched the ancient sands with a white, leprous radiance
which seemed to me somehow infinitely evil. There was no longer any wind, nor did any return
for nearly five hours, as amply attested by Tupper and others who did not sleep through the
night. The Australian last saw me walking rapidly across the pallid, secret-guarding hillocks
toward the northeast.
About 3:30 a.m. a violent wind blew up, waking everyone in camp and felling
three of the tents. The sky was unclouded, and the desert still blazed with that leprous moonlight.
As the party saw to the tents my absence was noted, but in view of my previous walks this circumstance
gave no one alarm. And yet as many as three men—all Australians—seemed to feel something
sinister in the air. Mackenzie explained to Prof. Freeborn that this was a fear picked up from
blackfellow folklore—the natives having woven a curious fabric of malignant myth about
the high winds which at long intervals sweep across the sands under a clear sky. Such winds,
it is whispered, blow out of the great stone huts under the ground where terrible things have
happened—and are never felt except near places where the big marked stones are scattered.
Close to four the gale subsided as suddenly as it had begun, leaving the sand hills in new and
unfamiliar shapes.
It was just past five, with the bloated, fungoid moon sinking in the west,
when I staggered into camp—hatless, tattered, features scratched and ensanguined, and
without my electric torch. Most of the men had returned to bed, but Prof. Dyer was smoking a
pipe in front of his tent. Seeing my winded and almost frenzied state, he called Dr. Boyle,
and the two of them got me on my cot and made me comfortable. My son, roused by the stir, soon
joined them, and they all tried to force me to lie still and attempt sleep.
But there was no sleep for me. My psychological state was very extraordinary—different
from anything I had previously suffered. After a time I insisted upon talking—nervously
and elaborately explaining my condition. I told them I had become fatigued, and had lain down
in the sand for a nap. There had, I said, been dreams even more frightful than usual—and
when I was awaked by the sudden high wind my overwrought nerves had snapped. I had fled in panic,
frequently falling over half-buried stones and thus gaining my tattered and bedraggled aspect.
I must have slept long—hence the hours of my absence.
Of anything strange either seen or experienced I hinted absolutely nothing—exercising
the greatest self-control in that respect. But I spoke of a change of mind regarding the whole
work of the expedition, and earnestly urged a halt in all digging toward the northeast. My reasoning
was patently weak—for I mentioned a dearth of blocks, a wish not to offend the superstitious
miners, a possible shortage of funds from the college, and other things either untrue or irrelevant.
Naturally, no one paid the least attention to my new wishes—not even my son, whose concern
for my health was very obvious.
The next day I was up and around the camp, but took no part in the excavations.
Seeing that I could not stop the work, I decided to return home as soon as possible for the
sake of my nerves, and made my son promise to fly me in the plane to Perth—a thousand
miles to the southwest—as soon as he had surveyed the region I wished let alone. If, I
reflected, the thing I had seen was still visible, I might decide to attempt a specific warning
even at the cost of ridicule. It was just conceivable that the miners who knew the local folklore
might back me up. Humouring me, my son made the survey that very afternoon; flying over all
the terrain my walk could possibly have covered. Yet nothing of what I had found remained in
sight. It was the case of the anomalous basalt block all over again—the shifting sand
had wiped out every trace. For an instant I half regretted having lost a certain awesome object
in my stark fright—but now I know that the loss was merciful. I can still believe my whole
experience an illusion—especially if, as I devoutly hope, that hellish abyss is never
found.
Wingate took me to Perth July 20, though declining to abandon the expedition
and return home. He stayed with me until the 25th, when the steamer for Liverpool sailed. Now,
in the cabin of the Empress, I am pondering long and frantically on the entire matter,
and have decided that my son at least must be informed. It shall rest with him whether to diffuse
the matter more widely. In order to meet any eventuality I have prepared this summary of my
background—as already known in a scattered way to others—and will now tell as briefly
as possible what seemed to happen during my absence from the camp that hideous night.
Nerves on edge, and whipped into a kind of perverse eagerness by that inexplicable,
dread-mingled, pseudo-mnemonic urge toward the northeast, I plodded on beneath the evil, burning
moon. Here and there I saw, half-shrouded by the sand, those primal Cyclopean blocks left from
nameless and forgotten aeons. The incalculable age and brooding horror of this monstrous waste
began to oppress me as never before, and I could not keep from thinking of my maddening dreams,
of the frightful legends which lay behind them, and of the present fears of natives and miners
concerning the desert and its carven stones.
And yet I plodded on as if to some eldritch rendezvous—more and more
assailed by bewildering fancies, compulsions, and pseudo-memories. I thought of some of the
possible contours of the lines of stones as seen by my son from the air, and wondered why they
seemed at once so ominous and so familiar. Something was fumbling and rattling at the latch
of my recollection, while another unknown force sought to keep the portal barred.
The night was windless, and the pallid sand curved upward and downward like
frozen waves of the sea. I had no goal, but somehow ploughed along as if with fate-bound assurance.
My dreams welled up into the waking world, so that each sand-embedded megalith seemed part of
endless rooms and corridors of pre-human masonry, carved and hieroglyphed with symbols that
I knew too well from years of custom as a captive mind of the Great Race. At moments I fancied
I saw those omniscient conical horrors moving about at their accustomed tasks, and I feared
to look down lest I find myself one with them in aspect. Yet all the while I saw the sand-covered
blocks as well as the rooms and corridors; the evil, burning moon as well as the lamps of luminous
crystal; the endless desert as well as the waving ferns and cycads beyond the windows. I was
awake and dreaming at the same time.
I do not know how long or how far—or indeed, in just what direction—I
had walked when I first spied the heap of blocks bared by the day’s wind. It was the largest
group in one place that I had so far seen, and so sharply did it impress me that the visions
of fabulous aeons faded suddenly away. Again there were only the desert and the evil moon and
the shards of an unguessed past. I drew close and paused, and cast the added light of my electric
torch over the tumbled pile. A hillock had blown away, leaving a low, irregularly round mass
of megaliths and smaller fragments some forty feet across and from two to eight feet high.
From the very outset I realised that there was some utterly unprecedented quality
about these stones. Not only was the mere number of them quite without parallel, but something
in the sand-worn traces of design arrested me as I scanned them under the mingled beams of the
moon and my torch. Not that any one differed essentially from the earlier specimens we had found.
It was something subtler than that. The impression did not come when I looked at one block alone,
but only when I ran my eye over several almost simultaneously. Then, at last, the truth dawned
upon me. The curvilinear patterns on many of these blocks were closely related—parts
of one vast decorative conception. For the first time in this aeon-shaken waste I had come upon
a mass of masonry in its old position—tumbled and fragmentary, it is true, but none the
less existing in a very definite sense.
Mounting at a low place, I clambered laboriously over the heap; here and there
clearing away the sand with my fingers, and constantly striving to interpret varieties of size,
shape, and style, and relationships of design. After a while I could vaguely guess at the nature
of the bygone structure, and at the designs which had once stretched over the vast surfaces
of the primal masonry. The perfect identity of the whole with some of my dream-glimpses appalled
and unnerved me. This was once a Cyclopean corridor thirty feet tall, paved with octagonal blocks
and solidly vaulted overhead. There would have been rooms opening off on the right, and at the
farther end one of those strange inclined planes would have wound down to still lower depths.
I started violently as these conceptions occurred to me, for there was more
in them than the blocks themselves had supplied. How did I know that this level should have
been far underground? How did I know that the plane leading upward should have been behind me?
How did I know that the long subterrene passage to the Square of Pillars ought to lie on the
left one level above me? How did I know that the room of machines, and the rightward-leading
tunnel to the central archives, ought to lie two levels below? How did I know that there would
be one of those horrible, metal-banded trap-doors at the very bottom, four levels down? Bewildered
by this intrusion from the dream-world, I found myself shaking and bathed in a cold perspiration.
Then, as a last, intolerable touch, I felt that faint, insidious stream of
cool air trickling upward from a depressed place near the centre of the huge heap. Instantly,
as once before, my visions faded, and I saw again only the evil moonlight, the brooding desert,
and the spreading tumulus of palaeogean masonry. Something real and tangible, yet fraught with
infinite suggestions of nighted mystery, now confronted me. For that stream of air could argue
but one thing—a hidden gulf of great size beneath the disordered blocks on the surface.
My first thought was of the sinister blackfellow legends of vast underground
huts among the megaliths where horrors happen and great winds are born. Then thoughts of my
own dreams came back, and I felt dim pseudo-memories tugging at my mind. What manner of place
lay below me? What primal, inconceivable source of age-old myth-cycles and haunting nightmares
might I be on the brink of uncovering? It was only for a moment that I hesitated, for more than
curiosity and scientific zeal was driving me on and working against my growing fear.
I seemed to move almost automatically, as if in the clutch of some compelling
fate. Pocketing my torch, and struggling with a strength that I had not thought I possessed,
I wrenched aside first one titan fragment of stone and then another, till there welled up a
strong draught whose dampness contrasted oddly with the desert’s dry air. A black rift
began to yawn, and at length—when I had pushed away every fragment small enough to budge—the
leprous moonlight blazed on an aperture of ample width to admit me.
I drew out my torch and cast a brilliant beam into the opening. Below me was
a chaos of tumbled masonry, sloping roughly down toward the north at an angle of about forty-five
degrees, and evidently the result of some bygone collapse from above. Between its surface and
the ground level was a gulf of impenetrable blackness at whose upper edge were signs of gigantic,
stress-heaved vaulting. At this point, it appeared, the desert’s sands lay directly upon
a floor of some titan structure of earth’s youth—how preserved through aeons of
geologic convulsion I could not then and cannot now even attempt to guess.
In retrospect, the barest idea of a sudden, lone descent into such a doubtful
abyss—and at a time when one’s whereabouts were unknown to any living soul—seems
like the utter apex of insanity. Perhaps it was—yet that night I embarked without hesitancy
upon such a descent. Again there was manifest that lure and driving of fatality which had all
along seemed to direct my course. With torch flashing intermittently to save the battery, I
commenced a mad scramble down the sinister, Cyclopean incline below the opening—sometimes
facing forward as I found good hand and foot holds, and at other times turning to face the heap
of megaliths as I clung and fumbled more precariously. In two directions beside me, distant
walls of carven, crumbling masonry loomed dimly under the direct beams of my torch. Ahead, however,
was only unbroken blackness.
I kept no track of time during my downward scramble. So seething with baffling
hints and images was my mind, that all objective matters seemed withdrawn into incalculable
distances. Physical sensation was dead, and even fear remained as a wraith-like, inactive gargoyle
leering impotently at me. Eventually I reached a level floor strown with fallen blocks, shapeless
fragments of stone, and sand and detritus of every kind. On either side—perhaps thirty
feet apart—rose massive walls culminating in huge groinings. That they were carved I could
just discern, but the nature of the carvings was beyond my perception. What held me the most
was the vaulting overhead. The beam from my torch could not reach the roof, but the lower parts
of the monstrous arches stood out distinctly. And so perfect was their identity with what I
had seen in countless dreams of the elder world, that I trembled actively for the first time.
Behind and high above, a faint luminous blur told of the distant moonlit world
outside. Some vague shred of caution warned me that I should not let it out of my sight, lest
I have no guide for my return. I now advanced toward the wall on my left, where the traces of
carving were plainest. The littered floor was nearly as hard to traverse as the downward heap
had been, but I managed to pick my difficult way. At one place I heaved aside some blocks and
kicked away the detritus to see what the pavement was like, and shuddered at the utter, fateful
familiarity of the great octagonal stones whose buckled surface still held roughly together.
Reaching a convenient distance from the wall, I cast the torchlight slowly
and carefully over its worn remnants of carving. Some bygone influx of water seemed to have
acted on the sandstone surface, while there were curious incrustations which I could not explain.
In places the masonry was very loose and distorted, and I wondered how many aeons more this
primal, hidden edifice could keep its remaining traces of form amidst earth’s heavings.
But it was the carvings themselves that excited me most. Despite their time-crumbled
state, they were relatively easy to trace at close range; and the complete, intimate familiarity
of every detail almost stunned my imagination. That the major attributes of this hoary masonry
should be familiar, was not beyond normal credibility. Powerfully impressing the weavers of
certain myths, they had become embodied in a stream of cryptic lore which, somehow coming to
my notice during the amnesic period, had evoked vivid images in my subconscious mind. But how
could I explain the exact and minute fashion in which each line and spiral of these strange
designs tallied with what I had dreamt for more than a score of years? What obscure, forgotten
iconography could have reproduced each subtle shading and nuance which so persistently, exactly,
and unvaryingly besieged my sleeping vision night after night?
For this was no chance or remote resemblance. Definitely and absolutely, the
millennially ancient, aeon-hidden corridor in which I stood was the original of something I
knew in sleep as intimately as I knew my own house in Crane Street, Arkham. True, my dreams
shewed the place in its undecayed prime; but the identity was no less real on that account.
I was wholly and horribly oriented. The particular structure I was in was known to me. Known,
too, was its place in that terrible elder city of dreams. That I could visit unerringly any
point in that structure or in that city which had escaped the changes and devastations of uncounted
ages, I realised with hideous and instinctive certainty. What in God’s name could all
this mean? How had I come to know what I knew? And what awful reality could lie behind those
antique tales of the beings who had dwelt in this labyrinth of primordial stone?
Words can convey only fractionally the welter of dread and bewilderment which
ate at my spirit. I knew this place. I knew what lay before me, and what had lain overhead before
the myriad towering stories had fallen to dust and debris and the desert. No need now, I thought
with a shudder, to keep that faint blur of moonlight in view. I was torn betwixt a longing to
flee and a feverish mixture of burning curiosity and driving fatality. What had happened to
this monstrous megalopolis of eld in the millions of years since the time of my dreams? Of the
subterrene mazes which had underlain the city and linked all its titan towers, how much had
still survived the writhings of earth’s crust?
Had I come upon a whole buried world of unholy archaism? Could I still find
the house of the writing-master, and the tower where S’gg’ha, a captive mind from
the star-headed vegetable carnivores of Antarctica, had chiselled certain pictures on the blank
spaces of the walls? Would the passage at the second level down, to the hall of the alien minds,
be still unchoked and traversable? In that hall the captive mind of an incredible entity—a
half-plastic denizen of the hollow interior of an unknown trans-Plutonian planet eighteen million
years in the future—had kept a certain thing which it had modelled from clay.
I shut my eyes and put my hand to my head in a vain, pitiful effort to drive
these insane dream-fragments from my consciousness. Then, for the first time, I felt acutely
the coolness, motion, and dampness of the surrounding air. Shuddering, I realised that a vast
chain of aeon-dead black gulfs must indeed be yawning somewhere beyond and below me. I thought
of the frightful chambers and corridors and inclines as I recalled them from my dreams. Would
the way to the central archives still be open? Again that driving fatality tugged insistently
at my brain as I recalled the awesome records that once lay cased in those rectangular vaults
of rustless metal.
There, said the dreams and legends, had reposed the whole history, past and
future, of the cosmic space-time continuum—written by captive minds from every orb and
every age in the solar system. Madness, of course—but had I not now stumbled into a nighted
world as mad as I? I thought of the locked metal shelves, and of the curious knob-twistings
needed to open each one. My own came vividly into my consciousness. How often had I gone through
that intricate routine of varied turns and pressures in the terrestrial vertebrate section on
the lowest level! Every detail was fresh and familiar. If there were such a vault as I had dreamed
of, I could open it in a moment. It was then that madness took me utterly. An instant later,
and I was leaping and stumbling over the rocky debris toward the well-remembered incline to
the depths below.
VII.

From that point forward my impressions are scarcely to be relied on—indeed, I still possess
a final, desperate hope that they all form parts of some daemoniac dream—or illusion born
of delirium. A fever raged in my brain, and everything came to me through a kind of haze—sometimes
only intermittently. The rays of my torch shot feebly into the engulfing blackness, bringing
phantasmal flashes of hideously familiar walls and carvings, all blighted with the decay of
ages. In one place a tremendous mass of vaulting had fallen, so that I had to clamber over a
mighty mound of stones reaching almost to the ragged, grotesquely stalactited roof. It was all
the ultimate apex of nightmare, made worse by the blasphemous tug of pseudo-memory. One thing
only was unfamiliar, and that was my own size in relation to the monstrous masonry. I felt oppressed
by a sense of unwonted smallness, as if the sight of these towering walls from a mere human
body was something wholly new and abnormal. Again and again I looked nervously down at myself,
vaguely disturbed by the human form I possessed.
Onward through the blackness of the abyss I leaped, plunged, and staggered—often
falling and bruising myself, and once nearly shattering my torch. Every stone and corner of
that daemoniac gulf was known to me, and at many points I stopped to cast beams of light through
choked and crumbling yet familiar archways. Some rooms had totally collapsed; others were bare
or debris-filled. In a few I saw masses of metal—some fairly intact, some broken, and
some crushed or battered—which I recognised as the colossal pedestals or tables of my
dreams. What they could in truth have been, I dared not guess.
I found the downward incline and began its descent—though after a time
halted by a gaping, ragged chasm whose narrowest point could not be much less than four feet
across. Here the stonework had fallen through, revealing incalculable inky depths beneath. I
knew there were two more cellar levels in this titan edifice, and trembled with fresh panic
as I recalled the metal-clamped trap-door on the lowest one. There could be no guards now—for
what had lurked beneath had long since done its hideous work and sunk into its long decline.
By the time of the post-human beetle race it would be quite dead. And yet, as I thought of the
native legends, I trembled anew.
It cost me a terrible effort to vault that yawning chasm, since the littered
floor prevented a running start—but madness drove me on. I chose a place close to the
left-hand wall—where the rift was least wide and the landing-spot reasonably clear of
dangerous debris—and after one frantic moment reached the other side in safety. At last
gaining the lower level, I stumbled on past the archway of the room of machines, within which
were fantastic ruins of metal half-buried beneath fallen vaulting. Everything was where I knew
it would be, and I climbed confidently over the heaps which barred the entrance of a vast transverse
corridor. This, I realised, would take me under the city to the central archives.
Endless ages seemed to unroll as I stumbled, leaped, and crawled along that
debris-cluttered corridor. Now and then I could make out carvings on the age-stained walls—some
familiar, others seemingly added since the period of my dreams. Since this was a subterrene
house-connecting highway, there were no archways save when the route led through the lower levels
of various buildings. At some of these intersections I turned aside long enough to look down
well-remembered corridors and into well-remembered rooms. Twice only did I find any radical
changes from what I had dreamed of—and in one of these cases I could trace the sealed-up
outlines of the archway I remembered.
I shook violently, and felt a curious surge of retarding weakness, as I steered
a hurried and reluctant course through the crypt of one of those great windowless ruined towers
whose alien basalt masonry bespoke a whispered and horrible origin. This primal vault was round
and fully two hundred feet across, with nothing carved upon the dark-hued stonework. The floor
was here free from anything save dust and sand, and I could see the apertures leading upward
and downward. There were no stairs or inclines—indeed, my dreams had pictured those elder
towers as wholly untouched by the fabulous Great Race. Those who had built them had not needed
stairs or inclines. In the dreams, the downward aperture had been tightly sealed and nervously
guarded. Now it lay open—black and yawning, and giving forth a current of cool, damp air.
Of what limitless caverns of eternal night might brood below, I would not permit myself to think.
Later, clawing my way along a badly heaped section of the corridor, I reached
a place where the roof had wholly caved in. The debris rose like a mountain, and I climbed up
over it, passing through a vast empty space where my torchlight could reveal neither walls nor
vaulting. This, I reflected, must be the cellar of the house of the metal-purveyors, fronting
on the third square not far from the archives. What had happened to it I could not conjecture.
I found the corridor again beyond the mountain of detritus and stones, but
after a short distance encountered a wholly choked place where the fallen vaulting almost touched
the perilously sagging ceiling. How I managed to wrench and tear aside enough blocks to afford
a passage, and how I dared disturb the tightly packed fragments when the least shift of equilibrium
might have brought down all the tons of superincumbent masonry to crush me to nothingness, I
do not know. It was sheer madness that impelled and guided me—if, indeed, my whole underground
adventure was not—as I hope—a hellish delusion or phase of dreaming. But I did make—or
dream that I made—a passage that I could squirm through. As I wriggled over the mound
of debris—my torch, switched continuously on, thrust deeply within my mouth—I felt
myself torn by the fantastic stalactites of the jagged floor above me.
I was now close to the great underground archival structure which seemed to
form my goal. Sliding and clambering down the farther side of the barrier, and picking my way
along the remaining stretch of corridor with hand-held, intermittently flashing torch, I came
at last to a low, circular crypt with arches—still in a marvellous state of preservation—opening
off on every side. The walls, or such parts of them as lay within reach of my torchlight, were
densely hieroglyphed and chiselled with typical curvilinear symbols—some added since the
period of my dreams.
This, I realised, was my fated destination, and I turned at once through a
familiar archway on my left. That I could find a clear passage up and down the incline to all
the surviving levels, I had oddly little doubt. This vast, earth-protected pile, housing the
annals of all the solar system, had been built with supernal skill and strength to last as long
as that system itself. Blocks of stupendous size, poised with mathematical genius and bound
with cements of incredible toughness, had combined to form a mass as firm as the planet’s
rocky core. Here, after ages more prodigious than I could sanely grasp, its buried bulk stood
in all its essential contours; the vast, dust-drifted floors scarce sprinkled with the litter
elsewhere so dominant.
The relatively easy walking from this point onward went curiously to my head.
All the frantic eagerness hitherto frustrated by obstacles now took itself out in a kind of
febrile speed, and I literally raced along the low-roofed, monstrously well-remembered aisles
beyond the archway. I was past being astonished by the familiarity of what I saw. On every hand
the great hieroglyphed metal shelf-doors loomed monstrously; some yet in place, others sprung
open, and still others bent and buckled under bygone geological stresses not quite strong enough
to shatter the titan masonry. Here and there a dust-covered heap below a gaping empty shelf
seemed to indicate where cases had been shaken down by earth-tremors. On occasional pillars
were great symbols or letters proclaiming classes and sub-classes of volumes.
Once I paused before an open vault where I saw some of the accustomed metal
cases still in position amidst the omnipresent gritty dust. Reaching up, I dislodged one of
the thinner specimens with some difficulty, and rested it on the floor for inspection. It was
titled in the prevailing curvilinear hieroglyphs, though something in the arrangement of the
characters seemed subtly unusual. The odd mechanism of the hooked fastener was perfectly well
known to me, and I snapped up the still rustless and workable lid and drew out the book within.
The latter, as expected, was some twenty by fifteen inches in area, and two inches thick; the
thin metal covers opening at the top. Its tough cellulose pages seemed unaffected by the myriad
cycles of time they had lived through, and I studied the queerly pigmented, brush-drawn letters
of the text—symbols utterly unlike either the usual curved hieroglyphs or any alphabet
known to human scholarship—with a haunting, half-aroused memory. It came to me that this
was the language used by a captive mind I had known slightly in my dreams—a mind from
a large asteroid on which had survived much of the archaic life and lore of the primal planet
whereof it formed a fragment. At the same time I recalled that this level of the archives was
devoted to volumes dealing with the non-terrestrial planets.
As I ceased poring over this incredible document I saw that the light of my
torch was beginning to fail, hence quickly inserted the extra battery I always had with me.
Then, armed with the stronger radiance, I resumed my feverish racing through unending tangles
of aisles and corridors—recognising now and then some familiar shelf, and vaguely annoyed
by the acoustic conditions which made my footfalls echo incongruously in these catacombs of
aeon-long death and silence. The very prints of my shoes behind me in the millennially untrodden
dust made me shudder. Never before, if my mad dreams held anything of truth, had human feet
pressed upon those immemorial pavements. Of the particular goal of my insane racing, my conscious
mind held no hint. There was, however, some force of evil potency pulling at my dazed will and
buried recollections, so that I vaguely felt I was not running at random.
I came to a downward incline and followed it to profounder depths. Floors flashed
by me as I raced, but I did not pause to explore them. In my whirling brain there had begun
to beat a certain rhythm which set my right hand twitching in unison. I wanted to unlock something,
and felt that I knew all the intricate twists and pressures needed to do it. It would be like
a modern safe with a combination lock. Dream or not, I had once known and still knew. How any
dream—or scrap of unconsciously absorbed legend—could have taught me a detail so
minute, so intricate, and so complex, I did not attempt to explain to myself. I was beyond all
coherent thought. For was not this whole experience—this shocking familiarity with a set
of unknown ruins, and this monstrously exact identity of everything before me with what only
dreams and scraps of myth could have suggested—a horror beyond all reason? Probably it
was my basic conviction then—as it is now during my saner moments—that I was not
awake at all, and that the entire buried city was a fragment of febrile hallucination.
Eventually I reached the lowest level and struck off to the right of the incline.
For some shadowy reason I tried to soften my steps, even though I lost speed thereby. There
was a space I was afraid to cross on this last, deeply buried floor, and as I drew near it I
recalled what thing in that space I feared. It was merely one of the metal-barred and closely
guarded trap-doors. There would be no guards now, and on that account I trembled and tiptoed
as I had done in passing through that black basalt vault where a similar trap-door had yawned.
I felt a current of cool, damp air, as I had felt there, and wished that my course led in another
direction. Why I had to take the particular course I was taking, I did not know.
When I came to the space I saw that the trap-door yawned widely open. Ahead
the shelves began again, and I glimpsed on the floor before one of them a heap very thinly covered
with dust, where a number of cases had recently fallen. At the same moment a fresh wave of panic
clutched me, though for some time I could not discover why. Heaps of fallen cases were not uncommon,
for all through the aeons this lightless labyrinth had been racked by the heavings of earth
and had echoed at intervals to the deafening clatter of toppling objects. It was only when I
was nearly across the space that I realised why I shook so violently.
Not the heap, but something about the dust of the level floor was troubling
me. In the light of my torch it seemed as if that dust were not as even as it ought to be—there
were places where it looked thinner, as if it had been disturbed not many months before. I could
not be sure, for even the apparently thinner places were dusty enough; yet a certain suspicion
of regularity in the fancied unevenness was highly disquieting. When I brought the torchlight
close to one of the queer places I did not like what I saw—for the illusion of regularity
became very great. It was as if there were regular lines of composite impressions—impressions
that went in threes, each slightly over a foot square, and consisting of five nearly circular
three-inch prints, one in advance of the other four.
These possible lines of foot-square impressions appeared to lead in two directions,
as if something had gone somewhere and returned. They were of course very faint, and may have
been illusions or accidents; but there was an element of dim, fumbling terror about the way
I thought they ran. For at one end of them was the heap of cases which must have clattered down
not long before, while at the other end was the ominous trap-door with the cool, damp wind,
yawning unguarded down to abysses past imagination.
VIII.

That my strange sense of compulsion was deep and overwhelming is shewn by its conquest of my
fear. No rational motive could have drawn me on after that hideous suspicion of prints and the
creeping dream-memories it excited. Yet my right hand, even as it shook with fright, still twitched
rhythmically in its eagerness to turn a lock it hoped to find. Before I knew it I was past the
heap of lately fallen cases and running on tiptoe through aisles of utterly unbroken dust toward
a point which I seemed to know morbidly, horribly well. My mind was asking itself questions
whose origin and relevancy I was only beginning to guess. Would the shelf be reachable by a
human body? Could my human hand master all the aeon-remembered motions of the lock? Would the
lock be undamaged and workable? And what would I do—what dare I do—with what (as
I now commenced to realise) I both hoped and feared to find? Would it prove the awesome, brain-shattering
truth of something past normal conception, or shew only that I was dreaming?
The next I knew I had ceased my tiptoe racing and was standing still, staring
at a row of maddeningly familiar hieroglyphed shelves. They were in a state of almost perfect
preservation, and only three of the doors in this vicinity had sprung open. My feelings toward
these shelves cannot be described—so utter and insistent was the sense of old acquaintance.
I was looking high up, at a row near the top and wholly out of my reach, and wondering how I
could climb to best advantage. An open door four rows from the bottom would help, and the locks
of the closed doors formed possible holds for hands and feet. I would grip the torch between
my teeth as I had in other places where both hands were needed. Above all, I must make no noise.
How to get down what I wished to remove would be difficult, but I could probably hook its movable
fastener in my coat collar and carry it like a knapsack. Again I wondered whether the lock would
be undamaged. That I could repeat each familiar motion I had not the least doubt. But I hoped
the thing would not scrape or creak—and that my hand could work it properly.
Even as I thought these things I had taken the torch in my mouth and begun
to climb. The projecting locks were poor supports; but as I had expected, the opened shelf helped
greatly. I used both the difficultly swinging door and the edge of the aperture itself in my
ascent, and managed to avoid any loud creaking. Balanced on the upper edge of the door, and
leaning far to my right, I could just reach the lock I sought. My fingers, half-numb from climbing,
were very clumsy at first; but I soon saw that they were anatomically adequate. And the memory-rhythm
was strong in them. Out of unknown gulfs of time the intricate secret motions had somehow reached
my brain correctly in every detail—for after less than five minutes of trying there came
a click whose familiarity was all the more startling because I had not consciously anticipated
it. In another instant the metal door was slowly swinging open with only the faintest grating
sound.
Dazedly I looked over the row of greyish case-ends thus exposed, and felt a
tremendous surge of some wholly inexplicable emotion. Just within reach of my right hand was
a case whose curving hieroglyphs made me shake with a pang infinitely more complex than one
of mere fright. Still shaking, I managed to dislodge it amidst a shower of gritty flakes, and
ease it over toward myself without any violent noise. Like the other case I had handled, it
was slightly more than twenty by fifteen inches in size, with curved mathematical designs in
low relief. In thickness it just exceeded three inches. Crudely wedging it between myself and
the surface I was climbing, I fumbled with the fastener and finally got the hook free. Lifting
the cover, I shifted the heavy object to my back, and let the hook catch hold of my collar.
Hands now free, I awkwardly clambered down to the dusty floor, and prepared to inspect my prize.
Kneeling in the gritty dust, I swung the case around and rested it in front
of me. My hands shook, and I dreaded to draw out the book within almost as much as I longed—and
felt compelled—to do so. It had very gradually become clear to me what I ought to find,
and this realisation nearly paralysed my faculties. If the thing were there—and if I were
not dreaming—the implications would be quite beyond the power of the human spirit to bear.
What tormented me most was my momentary inability to feel that my surroundings were a dream.
The sense of reality was hideous—and again becomes so as I recall the scene.
At length I tremblingly pulled the book from its container and stared fascinatedly
at the well-known hieroglyphs on the cover. It seemed to be in prime condition, and the curvilinear
letters of the title held me in almost as hypnotised a state as if I could read them. Indeed,
I cannot swear that I did not actually read them in some transient and terrible access of abnormal
memory. I do not know how long it was before I dared to lift that thin metal cover. I temporised
and made excuses to myself. I took the torch from my mouth and shut it off to save the battery.
Then, in the dark, I screwed up my courage—finally lifting the cover without turning on
the light. Last of all I did indeed flash the torch upon the exposed page—steeling myself
in advance to suppress any sound no matter what I should find.
I looked for an instant, then almost collapsed. Clenching my teeth, however,
I kept silence. I sank wholly to the floor and put a hand to my forehead amidst the engulfing
blackness. What I dreaded and expected was there. Either I was dreaming, or time and space had
become a mockery. I must be dreaming—but I would test the horror by carrying this thing
back and shewing it to my son if it were indeed a reality. My head swam frightfully, even though
there were no visible objects in the unbroken gloom to swirl around me. Ideas and images of
the starkest terror—excited by vistas which my glimpse had opened up—began to throng
in upon me and cloud my senses.
I thought of those possible prints in the dust, and trembled at the sound of
my own breathing as I did so. Once again I flashed on the light and looked at the page as a
serpent’s victim may look at his destroyer’s eyes and fangs. Then, with clumsy fingers
in the dark, I closed the book, put it in its container, and snapped the lid and the curious
hooked fastener. This was what I must carry back to the outer world if it truly existed—if
the whole abyss truly existed—if I, and the world itself, truly existed.
Just when I tottered to my feet and commenced my return I cannot be certain.
It comes to me oddly—as a measure of my sense of separation from the normal world—that
I did not even once look at my watch during those hideous hours underground. Torch in hand,
and with the ominous case under one arm, I eventually found myself tiptoeing in a kind of silent
panic past the draught-giving abyss and those lurking suggestions of prints. I lessened my precautions
as I climbed up the endless inclines, but could not shake off a shadow of apprehension which
I had not felt on the downward journey.
I dreaded having to re-pass through that black basalt crypt that was older
than the city itself, where cold draughts welled up from unguarded depths. I thought of that
which the Great Race had feared, and of what might still be lurking—be it ever so weak
and dying—down there. I thought of those possible five-circle prints and of what my dreams
had told me of such prints—and of strange winds and whistling noises associated with them.
And I thought of the tales of the modern blacks, wherein the horror of great winds and nameless
subterrene ruins was dwelt upon.
I knew from a carven wall symbol the right floor to enter, and came at last—after
passing that other book I had examined—to the great circular space with the branching
archways. On my right, and at once recognisable, was the arch through which I had arrived. This
I now entered, conscious that the rest of my course would be harder because of the tumbled state
of the masonry outside the archive building. My new metal-cased burden weighed upon me, and
I found it harder and harder to be quiet as I stumbled among debris and fragments of every sort.
Then I came to the ceiling-high mound of debris through which I had wrenched
a scanty passage. My dread at wriggling through again was infinite; for my first passage had
made some noise, and I now—after seeing those possible prints—dreaded sound above
all things. The case, too, doubled the problem of traversing the narrow crevice. But I clambered
up the barrier as best I could, and pushed the case through the aperture ahead of me. Then,
torch in mouth, I scrambled through myself—my back torn as before by stalactites. As I
tried to grasp the case again, it fell some distance ahead of me down the slope of the debris,
making a disturbing clatter and arousing echoes which sent me into a cold perspiration. I lunged
for it at once, and regained it without further noise—but a moment afterward the slipping
of blocks under my feet raised a sudden and unprecedented din.
The din was my undoing. For, falsely or not, I thought I heard it answered
in a terrible way from spaces far behind me. I thought I heard a shrill, whistling sound, like
nothing else on earth, and beyond any adequate verbal description. It may have been only my
imagination. If so, what followed has a grim irony—since, save for the panic of this thing,
the second thing might never have happened.
As it was, my frenzy was absolute and unrelieved. Taking my torch in my hand
and clutching feebly at the case, I leaped and bounded wildly ahead with no idea in my brain
beyond a mad desire to race out of these nightmare ruins to the waking world of desert and moonlight
which lay so far above. I hardly knew it when I reached the mountain of debris which towered
into the vast blackness beyond the caved-in roof, and bruised and cut myself repeatedly in scrambling
up its steep slope of jagged blocks and fragments. Then came the great disaster. Just as I blindly
crossed the summit, unprepared for the sudden dip ahead, my feet slipped utterly and I found
myself involved in a mangling avalanche of sliding masonry whose cannon-loud uproar split the
black cavern air in a deafening series of earth-shaking reverberations.
I have no recollection of emerging from this chaos, but a momentary fragment
of consciousness shews me as plunging and tripping and scrambling along the corridor amidst
the clangour—case and torch still with me. Then, just as I approached that primal basalt
crypt I had so dreaded, utter madness came. For as the echoes of the avalanche died down, there
became audible a repetition of that frightful, alien whistling I thought I had heard before.
This time there was no doubt about it—and what was worse, it came from a point not behind
but ahead of me.
Probably I shrieked aloud then. I have a dim picture of myself as flying through
the hellish basalt vault of the Elder Things, and hearing that damnable alien sound piping up
from the open, unguarded door of limitless nether blacknesses. There was a wind, too—not
merely a cool, damp draught, but a violent, purposeful blast belching savagely and frigidly
from that abominable gulf whence the obscene whistling came.
There are memories of leaping and lurching over obstacles of every sort, with
that torrent of wind and shrieking sound growing moment by moment, and seeming to curl and twist
purposefully around me as it struck out wickedly from the spaces behind and beneath. Though
in my rear, that wind had the odd effect of hindering instead of aiding my progress; as if it
acted like a noose or lasso thrown around me. Heedless of the noise I made, I clattered over
a great barrier of blocks and was again in the structure that led to the surface. I recall glimpsing
the archway to the room of machines and almost crying out as I saw the incline leading down
to where one of those blasphemous trap-doors must be yawning two levels below. But instead of
crying out I muttered over and over to myself that this was all a dream from which I must soon
awake. Perhaps I was in camp—perhaps I was at home in Arkham. As these hopes bolstered
up my sanity I began to mount the incline to the higher level.
I knew, of course, that I had the four-foot cleft to re-cross, yet was too
racked by other fears to realise the full horror until I came almost upon it. On my descent,
the leap across had been easy—but could I clear the gap as readily when going uphill,
and hampered by fright, exhaustion, the weight of the metal case, and the anomalous backward
tug of that daemon wind? I thought of these things at the last moment, and thought also of the
nameless entities which might be lurking in the black abysses below the chasm.
My wavering torch was growing feeble, but I could tell by some obscure memory
when I neared the cleft. The chill blasts of wind and the nauseous whistling shrieks behind
me were for the moment like a merciful opiate, dulling my imagination to the horror of the yawning
gulf ahead. And then I became aware of the added blasts and whistling in front of me—tides
of abomination surging up through the cleft itself from depths unimagined and unimaginable.
Now, indeed, the essence of pure nightmare was upon me. Sanity departed—and
ignoring everything except the animal impulse of flight, I merely struggled and plunged upward
over the incline’s debris as if no gulf had existed. Then I saw the chasm’s edge,
leaped frenziedly with every ounce of strength I possessed, and was instantly engulfed in a
pandaemoniac vortex of loathsome sound and utter, materially tangible blackness.
This is the end of my experience, so far as I can recall. Any further impressions
belong wholly to the domain of phantasmagoric delirium. Dream, madness, and memory merged wildly
together in a series of fantastic, fragmentary delusions which can have no relation to anything
real. There was a hideous fall through incalculable leagues of viscous, sentient darkness, and
a babel of noises utterly alien to all that we know of the earth and its organic life. Dormant,
rudimentary senses seemed to start into vitality within me, telling of pits and voids peopled
by floating horrors and leading to sunless crags and oceans and teeming cities of windowless
basalt towers upon which no light ever shone.
Secrets of the primal planet and its immemorial aeons flashed through my brain
without the aid of sight or sound, and there were known to me things which not even the wildest
of my former dreams had ever suggested. And all the while cold fingers of damp vapour clutched
and picked at me, and that eldritch, damnable whistling shrieked fiendishly above all the alternations
of babel and silence in the whirlpools of darkness around.
Afterward there were visions of the Cyclopean city of my dreams—not in
ruins, but just as I had dreamed of it. I was in my conical, non-human body again, and mingled
with crowds of the Great Race and the captive minds who carried books up and down the lofty
corridors and vast inclines. Then, superimposed upon these pictures, were frightful momentary
flashes of a non-visual consciousness involving desperate struggles, a writhing free from clutching
tentacles of whistling wind, an insane, bat-like flight through half-solid air, a feverish burrowing
through the cyclone-whipped dark, and a wild stumbling and scrambling over fallen masonry.
Once there was a curious, intrusive flash of half-sight—a faint, diffuse
suspicion of bluish radiance far overhead. Then there came a dream of wind-pursued climbing
and crawling—of wriggling into a blaze of sardonic moonlight through a jumble of debris
which slid and collapsed after me amidst a morbid hurricane. It was the evil, monotonous beating
of that maddening moonlight which at last told me of the return of what I had once known as
the objective, waking world.
I was clawing prone through the sands of the Australian desert, and around
me shrieked such a tumult of wind as I had never before known on our planet’s surface.
My clothing was in rags, and my whole body was a mass of bruises and scratches. Full consciousness
returned very slowly, and at no time could I tell just where true memory left off and delirious
dream began. There had seemed to be a mound of titan blocks, an abyss beneath it, a monstrous
revelation from the past, and a nightmare horror at the end—but how much of this was real?
My flashlight was gone, and likewise any metal case I may have discovered. Had there been such
a case—or any abyss—or any mound? Raising my head, I looked behind me, and saw only
the sterile, undulant sands of the waste.
The daemon wind died down, and the bloated, fungoid moon sank reddeningly in
the west. I lurched to my feet and began to stagger southwestward toward the camp. What in truth
had happened to me? Had I merely collapsed in the desert and dragged a dream-racked body over
miles of sand and buried blocks? If not, how could I bear to live any longer? For in this new
doubt all my faith in the myth-born unreality of my visions dissolved once more into the hellish
older doubting. If that abyss was real, then the Great Race was real—and its blasphemous
reachings and seizures in the cosmos-wide vortex of time were no myths or nightmares, but a
terrible, soul-shattering actuality.
Had I, in full hideous fact, been drawn back to a pre-human world of a hundred
and fifty million years ago in those dark, baffling days of the amnesia? Had my present body
been the vehicle of a frightful alien consciousness from palaeogean gulfs of time? Had I, as
the captive mind of those shambling horrors, indeed known that accursed city of stone in its
primordial heyday, and wriggled down those familiar corridors in the loathsome shape of my captor?
Were those tormenting dreams of more than twenty years the offspring of stark, monstrous 
memories? Had I once veritably talked with minds from reachless corners of time and space,
learned the universe’s secrets past and to come, and written the annals of my own world
for the metal cases of those titan archives? And were those others—those shocking Elder
Things of the mad winds and daemon pipings—in truth a lingering, lurking menace, waiting
and slowly weakening in black abysses while varied shapes of life drag out their multimillennial
courses on the planet’s age-racked surface?
I do not know. If that abyss and what it held were real, there is no hope.
Then, all too truly, there lies upon this world of man a mocking and incredible shadow out of
time. But mercifully, there is no proof that these things are other than fresh phases of my
myth-born dreams. I did not bring back the metal case that would have been a proof, and so far
those subterrene corridors have not been found. If the laws of the universe are kind, they will
never be found. But I must tell my son what I saw or thought I saw, and let him use his judgment
as a psychologist in gauging the reality of my experience, and communicating this account to
others.
I have said that the awful truth behind my tortured years of dreaming hinges
absolutely upon the actuality of what I thought I saw in those Cyclopean buried ruins. It has
been hard for me literally to set down the crucial revelation, though no reader can have failed
to guess it. Of course it lay in that book within the metal case—the case which I pried
out of its forgotten lair amidst the undisturbed dust of a million centuries. No eye had seen,
no hand had touched that book since the advent of man to this planet. And yet, when I flashed
my torch upon it in that frightful megalithic abyss, I saw that the queerly pigmented letters
on the brittle, aeon-browned cellulose pages were not indeed any nameless hieroglyphs of earth’s
youth. They were, instead, the letters of our familiar alphabet, spelling out the words of the
English language in my own handwriting.


The Shadow over Innsmouth

I.

During the winter of 1927–28 officials of the Federal government made a strange and secret
investigation of certain conditions in the ancient Massachusetts seaport of Innsmouth. The public
first learned of it in February, when a vast series of raids and arrests occurred, followed
by the deliberate burning and dynamiting—under suitable precautions—of an enormous
number of crumbling, worm-eaten, and supposedly empty houses along the abandoned waterfront.
Uninquiring souls let this occurrence pass as one of the major clashes in a spasmodic war on
liquor.
Keener news-followers, however, wondered at the prodigious number of arrests,
the abnormally large force of men used in making them, and the secrecy surrounding the disposal
of the prisoners. No trials, or even definite charges, were reported; nor were any of the captives
seen thereafter in the regular gaols of the nation. There were vague statements about disease
and concentration camps, and later about dispersal in various naval and military prisons, but
nothing positive ever developed. Innsmouth itself was left almost depopulated, and is even now
only beginning to shew signs of a sluggishly revived existence.
Complaints from many liberal organisations were met with long confidential
discussions, and representatives were taken on trips to certain camps and prisons. As a result,
these societies became surprisingly passive and reticent. Newspaper men were harder to manage,
but seemed largely to coöperate with the government in the end. Only one paper—a
tabloid always discounted because of its wild policy—mentioned the deep-diving submarine
that discharged torpedoes downward in the marine abyss just beyond Devil Reef. That item, gathered
by chance in a haunt of sailors, seemed indeed rather far-fetched; since the low, black reef
lies a full mile and a half out from Innsmouth Harbour.
People around the country and in the nearby towns muttered a great deal among
themselves, but said very little to the outer world. They had talked about dying and half-deserted
Innsmouth for nearly a century, and nothing new could be wilder or more hideous than what they
had whispered and hinted years before. Many things had taught them secretiveness, and there
was now no need to exert pressure on them. Besides, they really knew very little; for wide salt
marshes, desolate and unpeopled, keep neighbours off from Innsmouth on the landward side.
But at last I am going to defy the ban on speech about this thing. Results,
I am certain, are so thorough that no public harm save a shock of repulsion could ever accrue
from a hinting of what was found by those horrified raiders at Innsmouth. Besides, what was
found might possibly have more than one explanation. I do not know just how much of the whole
tale has been told even to me, and I have many reasons for not wishing to probe deeper. For
my contact with this affair has been closer than that of any other layman, and I have carried
away impressions which are yet to drive me to drastic measures.
It was I who fled frantically out of Innsmouth in the early morning hours of
July 16, 1927, and whose frightened appeals for government inquiry and action brought on the
whole reported episode. I was willing enough to stay mute while the affair was fresh and uncertain;
but now that it is an old story, with public interest and curiosity gone, I have an odd craving
to whisper about those few frightful hours in that ill-rumoured and evilly shadowed seaport
of death and blasphemous abnormality. The mere telling helps me to restore confidence in my
own faculties; to reassure myself that I was not simply the first to succumb to a contagious
nightmare hallucination. It helps me, too, in making up my mind regarding a certain terrible
step which lies ahead of me.
I never heard of Innsmouth till the day before I saw it for the first and—so
far—last time. I was celebrating my coming of age by a tour of New England—sightseeing,
antiquarian, and genealogical—and had planned to go directly from ancient Newburyport
to Arkham, whence my mother’s family was derived. I had no car, but was travelling by
train, trolley, and motor-coach, always seeking the cheapest possible route. In Newburyport
they told me that the steam train was the thing to take to Arkham; and it was only at the station
ticket-office, when I demurred at the high fare, that I learned about Innsmouth. The stout,
shrewd-faced agent, whose speech shewed him to be no local man, seemed sympathetic toward my
efforts at economy, and made a suggestion that none of my other informants had offered.
“You could take that old bus, I suppose,” he said with a
certain hesitation, “but it ain’t thought much of hereabouts. It goes through Innsmouth—you
may have heard about that—and so the people don’t like it. Run by an Innsmouth fellow—Joe
Sargent—but never gets any custom from here, or Arkham either, I guess. Wonder it keeps
running at all. I s’pose it’s cheap enough, but I never see more’n two or
three people in it—nobody but those Innsmouth folks. Leaves the Square—front of
Hammond’s Drug Store—at 10 a.m. and 7 p.m. unless they’ve changed lately.
Looks like a terrible rattletrap—I’ve never ben on it.”
That was the first I ever heard of shadowed Innsmouth. Any reference to a town
not shewn on common maps or listed in recent guide-books would have interested me, and the agent’s
odd manner of allusion roused something like real curiosity. A town able to inspire such dislike
in its neighbours, I thought, must be at least rather unusual, and worthy of a tourist’s
attention. If it came before Arkham I would stop off there—and so I asked the agent to
tell me something about it. He was very deliberate, and spoke with an air of feeling slightly
superior to what he said.
“Innsmouth? Well, it’s a queer kind of a town down at the mouth
of the Manuxet. Used to be almost a city—quite a port before the War of 1812—but
all gone to pieces in the last hundred years or so. No railroad now—B. & M. never
went through, and the branch line from Rowley was given up years ago.
“More empty houses than there are people, I guess, and no business to
speak of except fishing and lobstering. Everybody trades mostly here or in Arkham or
Ipswich. Once they had quite a few mills, but nothing’s left now except one gold refinery
running on the leanest kind of part time.
“That refinery, though, used to be a big thing, and Old Man Marsh, who
owns it, must be richer’n Croesus. Queer old duck, though, and sticks mighty close in
his home. He’s supposed to have developed some skin disease or deformity late in life
that makes him keep out of sight. Grandson of Captain Obed Marsh, who founded the business.
His mother seems to’ve ben some kind of foreigner—they say a South Sea islander—so
everybody raised Cain when he married an Ipswich girl fifty years ago. They always do that about
Innsmouth people, and folks here and hereabouts always try to cover up any Innsmouth blood they
have in ’em. But Marsh’s children and grandchildren look just like anyone else so
far’s I can see. I’ve had ’em pointed out to me here—though, come to
think of it, the elder children don’t seem to be around lately. Never saw the old man.
“And why is everybody so down on Innsmouth? Well, young fellow, you mustn’t
take too much stock in what people around here say. They’re hard to get started, but once
they do get started they never let up. They’ve ben telling things about Innsmouth—whispering
’em, mostly—for the last hundred years, I guess, and I gather they’re more
scared than anything else. Some of the stories would make you laugh—about old Captain
Marsh driving bargains with the devil and bringing imps out of hell to live in Innsmouth, or
about some kind of devil-worship and awful sacrifices in some place near the wharves that people
stumbled on around 1845 or thereabouts—but I come from Panton, Vermont, and that kind
of story don’t go down with me.
“You ought to hear, though, what some of the old-timers tell about the
black reef off the coast—Devil Reef, they call it. It’s well above water a good
part of the time, and never much below it, but at that you could hardly call it an island. The
story is that there’s a whole legion of devils seen sometimes on that reef—sprawled
about, or darting in and out of some kind of caves near the top. It’s a rugged, uneven
thing, a good bit over a mile out, and toward the end of shipping days sailors used to make
big detours just to avoid it.
“That is, sailors that didn’t hail from Innsmouth. One of the things
they had against old Captain Marsh was that he was supposed to land on it sometimes at night
when the tide was right. Maybe he did, for I dare say the rock formation was interesting, and
it’s just barely possible he was looking for pirate loot and maybe finding it; but there
was talk of his dealing with daemons there. Fact is, I guess on the whole it was really the
Captain that gave the bad reputation to the reef.
“That was before the big epidemic of 1846, when over half the folks in
Innsmouth was carried off. They never did quite figure out what the trouble was, but it was
probably some foreign kind of disease brought from China or somewhere by the shipping. It surely
was bad enough—there was riots over it, and all sorts of ghastly doings that I don’t
believe ever got outside of town—and it left the place in awful shape. Never came back—there
can’t be more’n 300 or 400 people living there now.
“But the real thing behind the way folks feel is simply race prejudice—and
I don’t say I’m blaming those that hold it. I hate those Innsmouth folks myself,
and I wouldn’t care to go to their town. I s’pose you know—though I can see
you’re a Westerner by your talk—what a lot our New England ships used to have to
do with queer ports in Africa, Asia, the South Seas, and everywhere else, and what queer kinds
of people they sometimes brought back with ’em. You’ve probably heard about the
Salem man that came home with a Chinese wife, and maybe you know there’s still a bunch
of Fiji Islanders somewhere around Cape Cod.
“Well, there must be something like that back of the Innsmouth people.
The place always was badly cut off from the rest of the country by marshes and creeks, and we
can’t be sure about the ins and outs of the matter; but it’s pretty clear that old
Captain Marsh must have brought home some odd specimens when he had all three of his ships in
commission back in the twenties and thirties. There certainly is a strange kind of streak in
the Innsmouth folks today—I don’t know how to explain it, but it sort of makes you
crawl. You’ll notice a little in Sargent if you take his bus. Some of ’em have queer
narrow heads with flat noses and bulgy, stary eyes that never seem to shut, and their skin ain’t
quite right. Rough and scabby, and the sides of their necks are all shrivelled or creased up.
Get bald, too, very young. The older fellows look the worst—fact is, I don’t believe
I’ve ever seen a very old chap of that kind. Guess they must die of looking in the glass!
Animals hate ’em—they used to have lots of horse trouble before autos came in.
“Nobody around here or in Arkham or Ipswich will have anything to do
with ’em, and they act kind of offish themselves when they come to town or when anyone
tries to fish on their grounds. Queer how fish are always thick off Innsmouth Harbour when there
ain’t any anywhere else around—but just try to fish there yourself and see how the
folks chase you off! Those people used to come here on the railroad—walking and taking
the train at Rowley after the branch was dropped—but now they use that bus.
“Yes, there’s a hotel in Innsmouth—called the Gilman House—but
I don’t believe it can amount to much. I wouldn’t advise you to try it. Better stay
over here and take the ten o’clock bus tomorrow morning; then you can get an evening bus
there for Arkham at eight o’clock. There was a factory inspector who stopped at the Gilman
a couple of years ago, and he had a lot of unpleasant hints about the place. Seems they get
a queer crowd there, for this fellow heard voices in other rooms—though most of ’em
was empty—that gave him the shivers. It was foreign talk, he thought, but he said the
bad thing about it was the kind of voice that sometimes spoke. It sounded so unnatural—slopping-like,
he said—that he didn’t dare undress and go to sleep. Just waited up and lit out
the first thing in the morning. The talk went on most all night.
“This fellow—Casey, his name was—had a lot to say about how
the Innsmouth folks watched him and seemed kind of on guard. He found the Marsh refinery a queer
place—it’s in an old mill on the lower falls of the Manuxet. What he said tallied
up with what I’d heard. Books in bad shape, and no clear account of any kind of dealings.
You know it’s always ben a kind of mystery where the Marshes get the gold they refine.
They’ve never seemed to do much buying in that line, but years ago they shipped out an
enormous lot of ingots.
“Used to be talk of a queer foreign kind of jewellery that the sailors
and refinery men sometimes sold on the sly, or that was seen once or twice on some of the Marsh
womenfolks. People allowed maybe old Captain Obed traded for it in some heathen port, especially
since he was always ordering stacks of glass beads and trinkets such as seafaring men used to
get for native trade. Others thought and still think he’d found an old pirate cache out
on Devil Reef. But here’s a funny thing. The old Captain’s ben dead these sixty
years, and there ain’t ben a good-sized ship out of the place since the Civil War; but
just the same the Marshes still keep on buying a few of those native trade things—mostly
glass and rubber gewgaws, they tell me. Maybe the Innsmouth folks like ’em to look at
themselves—Gawd knows they’ve gotten to be about as bad as South Sea cannibals and
Guinea savages.
“That plague of ’46 must have taken off the best blood in the place.
Anyway, they’re a doubtful lot now, and the Marshes and the other rich folks are as bad
as any. As I told you, there probably ain’t more’n 400 people in the whole town
in spite of all the streets they say there are. I guess they’re what they call ‘white
trash’ down South—lawless and sly, and full of secret doings. They get a lot of
fish and lobsters and do exporting by truck. Queer how the fish swarm right there and nowhere
else.
“Nobody can ever keep track of these people, and state school officials
and census men have a devil of a time. You can bet that prying strangers ain’t welcome
around Innsmouth. I’ve heard personally of more’n one business or government man
that’s disappeared there, and there’s loose talk of one who went crazy and is out
at Danvers now. They must have fixed up some awful scare for that fellow.
“That’s why I wouldn’t go at night if I was you. I’ve
never ben there and have no wish to go, but I guess a daytime trip couldn’t hurt you—even
though the people hereabouts will advise you not to make it. If you’re just sightseeing,
and looking for old-time stuff, Innsmouth ought to be quite a place for you.”
And so I spent part of that evening at the Newburyport Public Library looking
up data about Innsmouth. When I had tried to question the natives in the shops, the lunch room,
the garages, and the fire station, I had found them even harder to get started than the ticket-agent
had predicted; and realised that I could not spare the time to overcome their first instinctive
reticences. They had a kind of obscure suspiciousness, as if there were something amiss with
anyone too much interested in Innsmouth. At the Y.M.C.A., where I was stopping, the clerk merely
discouraged my going to such a dismal, decadent place; and the people at the library shewed
much the same attitude. Clearly, in the eyes of the educated, Innsmouth was merely an exaggerated
case of civic degeneration.
The Essex County histories on the library shelves had very little to say, except
that the town was founded in 1643, noted for shipbuilding before the Revolution, a seat of great
marine prosperity in the early nineteenth century, and later a minor factory centre using the
Manuxet as power. The epidemic and riots of 1846 were very sparsely treated, as if they formed
a discredit to the county.
References to decline were few, though the significance of the later record
was unmistakable. After the Civil War all industrial life was confined to the Marsh Refining
Company, and the marketing of gold ingots formed the only remaining bit of major commerce aside
from the eternal fishing. That fishing paid less and less as the price of the commodity fell
and large-scale corporations offered competition, but there was never a dearth of fish around
Innsmouth Harbour. Foreigners seldom settled there, and there was some discreetly veiled evidence
that a number of Poles and Portuguese who had tried it had been scattered in a peculiarly drastic
fashion.
Most interesting of all was a glancing reference to the strange jewellery
vaguely associated with Innsmouth. It had evidently impressed the whole countryside more than
a little, for mention was made of specimens in the museum of Miskatonic University at Arkham,
and in the display room of the Newburyport Historical Society. The fragmentary descriptions
of these things were bald and prosaic, but they hinted to me an undercurrent of persistent strangeness.
Something about them seemed so odd and provocative that I could not put them out of my mind,
and despite the relative lateness of the hour I resolved to see the local sample—said
to be a large, queerly proportioned thing evidently meant for a tiara—if it could possibly
be arranged.
The librarian gave me a note of introduction to the curator of the Society,
a Miss Anna Tilton, who lived nearby, and after a brief explanation that ancient gentlewoman
was kind enough to pilot me into the closed building, since the hour was not outrageously late.
The collection was a notable one indeed, but in my present mood I had eyes for nothing but the
bizarre object which glistened in a corner cupboard under the electric lights.
It took no excessive sensitiveness to beauty to make me literally gasp at the
strange, unearthly splendour of the alien, opulent phantasy that rested there on a purple velvet
cushion. Even now I can hardly describe what I saw, though it was clearly enough a sort of tiara,
as the description had said. It was tall in front, and with a very large and curiously irregular
periphery, as if designed for a head of almost freakishly elliptical outline. The material seemed
to be predominantly gold, though a weird lighter lustrousness hinted at some strange alloy with
an equally beautiful and scarcely identifiable metal. Its condition was almost perfect, and
one could have spent hours in studying the striking and puzzlingly untraditional designs—some
simply geometrical, and some plainly marine—chased or moulded in high relief on its surface
with a craftsmanship of incredible skill and grace.
The longer I looked, the more the thing fascinated me; and in this fascination
there was a curiously disturbing element hardly to be classified or accounted for. At first
I decided that it was the queer other-worldly quality of the art which made me uneasy. All other
art objects I had ever seen either belonged to some known racial or national stream, or else
were consciously modernistic defiances of every recognised stream. This tiara was neither. It
clearly belonged to some settled technique of infinite maturity and perfection, yet that technique
was utterly remote from any—Eastern or Western, ancient or modern—which I had ever
heard of or seen exemplified. It was as if the workmanship were that of another planet.
However, I soon saw that my uneasiness had a second and perhaps equally potent
source residing in the pictorial and mathematical suggestions of the strange designs. The patterns
all hinted of remote secrets and unimaginable abysses in time and space, and the monotonously
aquatic nature of the reliefs became almost sinister. Among these reliefs were fabulous monsters
of abhorrent grotesqueness and malignity—half ichthyic and half batrachian in suggestion—which
one could not dissociate from a certain haunting and uncomfortable sense of pseudo-memory, as
if they called up some image from deep cells and tissues whose retentive functions are wholly
primal and awesomely ancestral. At times I fancied that every contour of these blasphemous fish-frogs
was overflowing with the ultimate quintessence of unknown and inhuman evil.
In odd contrast to the tiara’s aspect was its brief and prosy history
as related by Miss Tilton. It had been pawned for a ridiculous sum at a shop in State Street
in 1873, by a drunken Innsmouth man shortly afterward killed in a brawl. The Society had acquired
it directly from the pawnbroker, at once giving it a display worthy of its quality. It was labelled
as of probable East-Indian or Indo-Chinese provenance, though the attribution was frankly tentative.
Miss Tilton, comparing all possible hypotheses regarding its origin and its
presence in New England, was inclined to believe that it formed part of some exotic pirate hoard
discovered by old Captain Obed Marsh. This view was surely not weakened by the insistent offers
of purchase at a high price which the Marshes began to make as soon as they knew of its presence,
and which they repeated to this day despite the Society’s unvarying determination not
to sell.
As the good lady shewed me out of the building she made it clear that the pirate
theory of the Marsh fortune was a popular one among the intelligent people of the region. Her
own attitude toward shadowed Innsmouth—which she had never seen—was one of disgust
at a community slipping far down the cultural scale, and she assured me that the rumours of
devil-worship were partly justified by a peculiar secret cult which had gained force there and
engulfed all the orthodox churches.
It was called, she said, “The Esoteric Order of Dagon”, and was
undoubtedly a debased, quasi-pagan thing imported from the East a century before, at a time
when the Innsmouth fisheries seemed to be going barren. Its persistence among a simple people
was quite natural in view of the sudden and permanent return of abundantly fine fishing, and
it soon came to be the greatest influence on the town, replacing Freemasonry altogether and
taking up headquarters in the old Masonic Hall on New Church Green.
All this, to the pious Miss Tilton, formed an excellent reason for shunning
the ancient town of decay and desolation; but to me it was merely a fresh incentive. To my architectural
and historical anticipations was now added an acute anthropological zeal, and I could scarcely
sleep in my small room at the “Y” as the night wore away.
II.
Shortly before ten the next morning I stood with one small valise in front
of Hammond’s Drug Store in old Market Square waiting for the Innsmouth bus. As the hour
for its arrival drew near I noticed a general drift of the loungers to other places up the street,
or to the Ideal Lunch across the square. Evidently the ticket-agent had not exaggerated the
dislike which local people bore toward Innsmouth and its denizens. In a few moments a small
motor-coach of extreme decrepitude and dirty grey colour rattled down State Street, made a turn,
and drew up at the curb beside me. I felt immediately that it was the right one; a guess which
the half-illegible sign on the windshield—“Arkham-Innsmouth-Newb’port”—soon
verified.
There were only three passengers—dark, unkempt men of sullen visage and
somewhat youthful cast—and when the vehicle stopped they clumsily shambled out and began
walking up State Street in a silent, almost furtive fashion. The driver also alighted, and I
watched him as he went into the drug store to make some purchase. This, I reflected, must be
the Joe Sargent mentioned by the ticket-agent; and even before I noticed any details there spread
over me a wave of spontaneous aversion which could be neither checked nor explained. It suddenly
struck me as very natural that the local people should not wish to ride on a bus owned and driven
by this man, or to visit any oftener than possible the habitat of such a man and his kinsfolk.
When the driver came out of the store I looked at him more carefully and tried
to determine the source of my evil impression. He was a thin, stoop-shouldered man not much
under six feet tall, dressed in shabby blue civilian clothes and wearing a frayed grey golf
cap. His age was perhaps thirty-five, but the odd, deep creases in the sides of his neck made
him seem older when one did not study his dull, expressionless face. He had a narrow head, bulging,
watery blue eyes that seemed never to wink, a flat nose, a receding forehead and chin, and singularly
undeveloped ears. His long, thick lip and coarse-pored, greyish cheeks seemed almost beardless
except for some sparse yellow hairs that straggled and curled in irregular patches; and in places
the surface seemed queerly irregular, as if peeling from some cutaneous disease. His hands were
large and heavily veined, and had a very unusual greyish-blue tinge. The fingers were strikingly
short in proportion to the rest of the structure, and seemed to have a tendency to curl closely
into the huge palm. As he walked toward the bus I observed his peculiarly shambling gait and
saw that his feet were inordinately immense. The more I studied them the more I wondered how
he could buy any shoes to fit them.
A certain greasiness about the fellow increased my dislike. He was evidently
given to working or lounging around the fish docks, and carried with him much of their characteristic
smell. Just what foreign blood was in him I could not even guess. His oddities certainly did
not look Asiatic, Polynesian, Levantine, or negroid, yet I could see why the people found him
alien. I myself would have thought of biological degeneration rather than alienage.
I was sorry when I saw that there would be no other passengers on the bus.
Somehow I did not like the idea of riding alone with this driver. But as leaving time obviously
approached I conquered my qualms and followed the man aboard, extending him a dollar bill and
murmuring the single word “Innsmouth”. He looked curiously at me for a second as
he returned forty cents change without speaking. I took a seat far behind him, but on the same
side of the bus, since I wished to watch the shore during the journey.
At length the decrepit vehicle started with a jerk, and rattled noisily past
the old brick buildings of State Street amidst a cloud of vapour from the exhaust. Glancing
at the people on the sidewalks, I thought I detected in them a curious wish to avoid looking
at the bus—or at least a wish to avoid seeming to look at it. Then we turned to the left
into High Street, where the going was smoother; flying by stately old mansions of the early
republic and still older colonial farmhouses, passing the Lower Green and Parker River, and
finally emerging into a long, monotonous stretch of open shore country.
The day was warm and sunny, but the landscape of sand, sedge-grass, and stunted
shrubbery became more and more desolate as we proceeded. Out the window I could see the blue
water and the sandy line of Plum Island, and we presently drew very near the beach as our narrow
road veered off from the main highway to Rowley and Ipswich. There were no visible houses, and
I could tell by the state of the road that traffic was very light hereabouts. The small, weather-worn
telephone poles carried only two wires. Now and then we crossed crude wooden bridges over tidal
creeks that wound far inland and promoted the general isolation of the region.
Once in a while I noticed dead stumps and crumbling foundation-walls above
the drifting sand, and recalled the old tradition quoted in one of the histories I had read,
that this was once a fertile and thickly settled countryside. The change, it was said, came
simultaneously with the Innsmouth epidemic of 1846, and was thought by simple folk to have a
dark connexion with hidden forces of evil. Actually, it was caused by the unwise cutting of
woodlands near the shore, which robbed the soil of its best protection and opened the way for
waves of wind-blown sand.
At last we lost sight of Plum Island and saw the vast expanse of the open Atlantic
on our left. Our narrow course began to climb steeply, and I felt a singular sense of disquiet
in looking at the lonely crest ahead where the rutted roadway met the sky. It was as if the
bus were about to keep on in its ascent, leaving the sane earth altogether and merging with
the unknown arcana of upper air and cryptical sky. The smell of the sea took on ominous implications,
and the silent driver’s bent, rigid back and narrow head became more and more hateful.
As I looked at him I saw that the back of his head was almost as hairless as his face, having
only a few straggling yellow strands upon a grey scabrous surface.
Then we reached the crest and beheld the outspread valley beyond, where the
Manuxet joins the sea just north of the long line of cliffs that culminate in Kingsport Head
and veer off toward Cape Ann. On the far, misty horizon I could just make out the dizzy profile
of the Head, topped by the queer ancient house of which so many legends are told; but for the
moment all my attention was captured by the nearer panorama just below me. I had, I realised,
come face to face with rumour-shadowed Innsmouth.
It was a town of wide extent and dense construction, yet one with a portentous
dearth of visible life. From the tangle of chimney-pots scarcely a wisp of smoke came, and the
three tall steeples loomed stark and unpainted against the seaward horizon. One of them was
crumbling down at the top, and in that and another there were only black gaping holes where
clock-dials should have been. The vast huddle of sagging gambrel roofs and peaked gables conveyed
with offensive clearness the idea of wormy decay, and as we approached along the now descending
road I could see that many roofs had wholly caved in. There were some large square Georgian
houses, too, with hipped roofs, cupolas, and railed “widow’s walks”. These
were mostly well back from the water, and one or two seemed to be in moderately sound condition.
Stretching inland from among them I saw the rusted, grass-grown line of the abandoned railway,
with leaning telegraph-poles now devoid of wires, and the half-obscured lines of the old carriage
roads to Rowley and Ipswich.
The decay was worst close to the waterfront, though in its very midst I could
spy the white belfry of a fairly well-preserved brick structure which looked like a small factory.
The harbour, long clogged with sand, was enclosed by an ancient stone breakwater; on which I
could begin to discern the minute forms of a few seated fishermen, and at whose end were what
looked like the foundations of a bygone lighthouse. A sandy tongue had formed inside this barrier,
and upon it I saw a few decrepit cabins, moored dories, and scattered lobster-pots. The only
deep water seemed to be where the river poured out past the belfried structure and turned southward
to join the ocean at the breakwater’s end.
Here and there the ruins of wharves jutted out from the shore to end in indeterminate
rottenness, those farthest south seeming the most decayed. And far out at sea, despite a high
tide, I glimpsed a long, black line scarcely rising above the water yet carrying a suggestion
of odd latent malignancy. This, I knew, must be Devil Reef. As I looked, a subtle, curious sense
of beckoning seemed superadded to the grim repulsion; and oddly enough, I found this overtone
more disturbing than the primary impression.
We met no one on the road, but presently began to pass deserted farms in varying
stages of ruin. Then I noticed a few inhabited houses with rags stuffed in the broken windows
and shells and dead fish lying about the littered yards. Once or twice I saw listless-looking
people working in barren gardens or digging clams on the fishy-smelling beach below, and groups
of dirty, simian-visaged children playing around weed-grown doorsteps. Somehow these people
seemed more disquieting than the dismal buildings, for almost every one had certain peculiarities
of face and motions which I instinctively disliked without being able to define or comprehend
them. For a second I thought this typical physique suggested some picture I had seen, perhaps
in a book, under circumstances of particular horror or melancholy; but this pseudo-recollection
passed very quickly.
As the bus reached a lower level I began to catch the steady note of a waterfall
through the unnatural stillness. The leaning, unpainted houses grew thicker, lined both sides
of the road, and displayed more urban tendencies than did those we were leaving behind. The
panorama ahead had contracted to a street scene, and in spots I could see where a cobblestone
pavement and stretches of brick sidewalk had formerly existed. All the houses were apparently
deserted, and there were occasional gaps where tumbledown chimneys and cellar walls told of
buildings that had collapsed. Pervading everything was the most nauseous fishy odour imaginable.
Soon cross streets and junctions began to appear; those on the left leading
to shoreward realms of unpaved squalor and decay, while those on the right shewed vistas of
departed grandeur. So far I had seen no people in the town, but there now came signs of a sparse
habitation—curtained windows here and there, and an occasional battered motor-car at the
curb. Pavement and sidewalks were increasingly well defined, and though most of the houses were
quite old—wood and brick structures of the early nineteenth century—they were obviously
kept fit for habitation. As an amateur antiquarian I almost lost my olfactory disgust and my
feeling of menace and repulsion amidst this rich, unaltered survival from the past.
But I was not to reach my destination without one very strong impression of
poignantly disagreeable quality. The bus had come to a sort of open concourse or radial point
with churches on two sides and the bedraggled remains of a circular green in the centre, and
I was looking at a large pillared hall on the right-hand junction ahead. The structure’s
once white paint was now grey and peeling, and the black and gold sign on the pediment was so
faded that I could only with difficulty make out the words “Esoteric Order of Dagon”.
This, then, was the former Masonic Hall now given over to a degraded cult. As I strained to
decipher this inscription my notice was distracted by the raucous tones of a cracked bell across
the street, and I quickly turned to look out the window on my side of the coach.
The sound came from a squat-towered stone church of manifestly later date than
most of the houses, built in a clumsy Gothic fashion and having a disproportionately high basement
with shuttered windows. Though the hands of its clock were missing on the side I glimpsed, I
knew that those hoarse strokes were telling the hour of eleven. Then suddenly all thoughts of
time were blotted out by an onrushing image of sharp intensity and unaccountable horror which
had seized me before I knew what it really was. The door of the church basement was open, revealing
a rectangle of blackness inside. And as I looked, a certain object crossed or seemed to cross
that dark rectangle; burning into my brain a momentary conception of nightmare which was all
the more maddening because analysis could not shew a single nightmarish quality in it.
It was a living object—the first except the driver that I had seen since
entering the compact part of the town—and had I been in a steadier mood I would have found
nothing whatever of terror in it. Clearly, as I realised a moment later, it was the pastor;
clad in some peculiar vestments doubtless introduced since the Order of Dagon had modified the
ritual of the local churches. The thing which had probably caught my first subconscious glance
and supplied the touch of bizarre horror was the tall tiara he wore; an almost exact duplicate
of the one Miss Tilton had shewn me the previous evening. This, acting on my imagination, had
supplied namelessly sinister qualities to the indeterminate face and robed, shambling form beneath
it. There was not, I soon decided, any reason why I should have felt that shuddering touch of
evil pseudo-memory. Was it not natural that a local mystery cult should adopt among its regimentals
an unique type of head-dress made familiar to the community in some strange way—perhaps
as treasure-trove?
A very thin sprinkling of repellent-looking youngish people now became visible
on the sidewalks—lone individuals, and silent knots of two or three. The lower floors
of the crumbling houses sometimes harboured small shops with dingy signs, and I noticed a parked
truck or two as we rattled along. The sound of waterfalls became more and more distinct, and
presently I saw a fairly deep river-gorge ahead, spanned by a wide, iron-railed highway bridge
beyond which a large square opened out. As we clanked over the bridge I looked out on both sides
and observed some factory buildings on the edge of the grassy bluff or part way down. The water
far below was very abundant, and I could see two vigorous sets of falls upstream on my right
and at least one downstream on my left. From this point the noise was quite deafening. Then
we rolled into the large semicircular square across the river and drew up on the right-hand
side in front of a tall, cupola-crowned building with remnants of yellow paint and with a half-effaced
sign proclaiming it to be the Gilman House.
I was glad to get out of that bus, and at once proceeded to check my valise
in the shabby hotel lobby. There was only one person in sight—an elderly man without what
I had come to call the “Innsmouth look”—and I decided not to ask him any of
the questions which bothered me; remembering that odd things had been noticed in this hotel.
Instead, I strolled out on the square, from which the bus had already gone, and studied the
scene minutely and appraisingly.
One side of the cobblestoned open space was the straight line of the river;
the other was a semicircle of slant-roofed brick buildings of about the 1800 period, from which
several streets radiated away to the southeast, south, and southwest. Lamps were depressingly
few and small—all low-powered incandescents—and I was glad that my plans called
for departure before dark, even though I knew the moon would be bright. The buildings were all
in fair condition, and included perhaps a dozen shops in current operation; of which one was
a grocery of the First National chain, others a dismal restaurant, a drug store, and a wholesale
fish-dealer’s office, and still another, at the eastern extremity of the square near the
river, an office of the town’s only industry—the Marsh Refining Company. There were
perhaps ten people visible, and four or five automobiles and motor trucks stood scattered about.
I did not need to be told that this was the civic centre of Innsmouth. Eastward I could catch
blue glimpses of the harbour, against which rose the decaying remains of three once beautiful
Georgian steeples. And toward the shore on the opposite bank of the river I saw the white belfry
surmounting what I took to be the Marsh refinery.
For some reason or other I chose to make my first inquiries at the chain grocery,
whose personnel was not likely to be native to Innsmouth. I found a solitary boy of about seventeen
in charge, and was pleased to note the brightness and affability which promised cheerful information.
He seemed exceptionally eager to talk, and I soon gathered that he did not like the place, its
fishy smell, or its furtive people. A word with any outsider was a relief to him. He hailed
from Arkham, boarded with a family who came from Ipswich, and went back home whenever he got
a moment off. His family did not like him to work in Innsmouth, but the chain had transferred
him there and he did not wish to give up his job.
There was, he said, no public library or chamber of commerce in Innsmouth,
but I could probably find my way about. The street I had come down was Federal. West of that
were the fine old residence streets—Broad, Washington, Lafayette, and Adams—and
east of it were the shoreward slums. It was in these slums—along Main Street—that
I would find the old Georgian churches, but they were all long abandoned. It would be well not
to make oneself too conspicuous in such neighbourhoods—especially north of the river—since
the people were sullen and hostile. Some strangers had even disappeared.
Certain spots were almost forbidden territory, as he had learned at considerable
cost. One must not, for example, linger much around the Marsh refinery, or around any of the
still used churches, or around the pillared Order of Dagon Hall at New Church Green. Those churches
were very odd—all violently disavowed by their respective denominations elsewhere, and
apparently using the queerest kind of ceremonials and clerical vestments. Their creeds were
heterodox and mysterious, involving hints of certain marvellous transformations leading to bodily
immortality—of a sort—on this earth. The youth’s own pastor—Dr. Wallace
of Asbury M. E. Church in Arkham—had gravely urged him not to join any church in Innsmouth.
As for the Innsmouth people—the youth hardly knew what to make of them.
They were as furtive and seldom seen as animals that live in burrows, and one could hardly imagine
how they passed the time apart from their desultory fishing. Perhaps—judging from the
quantities of bootleg liquor they consumed—they lay for most of the daylight hours in
an alcoholic stupor. They seemed sullenly banded together in some sort of fellowship and understanding—despising
the world as if they had access to other and preferable spheres of entity. Their appearance—especially
those staring, unwinking eyes which one never saw shut—was certainly shocking enough;
and their voices were disgusting. It was awful to hear them chanting in their churches at night,
and especially during their main festivals or revivals, which fell twice a year on April 30th
and October 31st.
They were very fond of the water, and swam a great deal in both river and harbour.
Swimming races out to Devil Reef were very common, and everyone in sight seemed well able to
share in this arduous sport. When one came to think of it, it was generally only rather young
people who were seen about in public, and of these the oldest were apt to be the most tainted-looking.
When exceptions did occur, they were mostly persons with no trace of aberrancy, like the old
clerk at the hotel. One wondered what became of the bulk of the older folk, and whether the
“Innsmouth look” were not a strange and insidious disease-phenomenon which increased
its hold as years advanced.
Only a very rare affliction, of course, could bring about such vast and radical
anatomical changes in a single individual after maturity—changes involving osseous factors
as basic as the shape of the skull—but then, even this aspect was no more baffling and
unheard-of than the visible features of the malady as a whole. It would be hard, the youth implied,
to form any real conclusions regarding such a matter; since one never came to know the natives
personally no matter how long one might live in Innsmouth.
The youth was certain that many specimens even worse than the worst visible
ones were kept locked indoors in some places. People sometimes heard the queerest kind of sounds.
The tottering waterfront hovels north of the river were reputedly connected by hidden tunnels,
being thus a veritable warren of unseen abnormalities. What kind of foreign blood—if any—these
beings had, it was impossible to tell. They sometimes kept certain especially repulsive characters
out of sight when government agents and others from the outside world came to town.
It would be of no use, my informant said, to ask the natives anything about
the place. The only one who would talk was a very aged but normal-looking man who lived at the
poorhouse on the north rim of the town and spent his time walking about or lounging around the
fire station. This hoary character, Zadok Allen, was ninety-six years old and somewhat touched
in the head, besides being the town drunkard. He was a strange, furtive creature who constantly
looked over his shoulder as if afraid of something, and when sober could not be persuaded to
talk at all with strangers. He was, however, unable to resist any offer of his favourite poison;
and once drunk would furnish the most astonishing fragments of whispered reminiscence.
After all, though, little useful data could be gained from him; since his stories
were all insane, incomplete hints of impossible marvels and horrors which could have no source
save in his own disordered fancy. Nobody ever believed him, but the natives did not like him
to drink and talk with strangers; and it was not always safe to be seen questioning him. It
was probably from him that some of the wildest popular whispers and delusions were derived.
Several non-native residents had reported monstrous glimpses from time to time,
but between old Zadok’s tales and the malformed denizens it was no wonder such illusions
were current. None of the non-natives ever stayed out late at night, there being a widespread
impression that it was not wise to do so. Besides, the streets were loathsomely dark.
As for business—the abundance of fish was certainly almost uncanny, but
the natives were taking less and less advantage of it. Moreover, prices were falling and competition
was growing. Of course the town’s real business was the refinery, whose commercial office
was on the square only a few doors east of where we stood. Old Man Marsh was never seen, but
sometimes went to the works in a closed, curtained car.
There were all sorts of rumours about how Marsh had come to look. He had once
been a great dandy, and people said he still wore the frock-coated finery of the Edwardian age,
curiously adapted to certain deformities. His sons had formerly conducted the office in the
square, but latterly they had been keeping out of sight a good deal and leaving the brunt of
affairs to the younger generation. The sons and their sisters had come to look very queer, especially
the elder ones; and it was said that their health was failing.
One of the Marsh daughters was a repellent, reptilian-looking woman who wore
an excess of weird jewellery clearly of the same exotic tradition as that to which the strange
tiara belonged. My informant had noticed it many times, and had heard it spoken of as coming
from some secret hoard, either of pirates or of daemons. The clergymen—or priests, or
whatever they were called nowadays—also wore this kind of ornament as a head-dress; but
one seldom caught glimpses of them. Other specimens the youth had not seen, though many were
rumoured to exist around Innsmouth.
The Marshes, together with the other three gently bred families of the town—the
Waites, the Gilmans, and the Eliots—were all very retiring. They lived in immense houses
along Washington Street, and several were reputed to harbour in concealment certain living kinsfolk
whose personal aspect forbade public view, and whose deaths had been reported and recorded.
Warning me that many of the street signs were down, the youth drew for my benefit
a rough but ample and painstaking sketch map of the town’s salient features. After a moment’s
study I felt sure that it would be of great help, and pocketed it with profuse thanks. Disliking
the dinginess of the single restaurant I had seen, I bought a fair supply of cheese crackers
and ginger wafers to serve as a lunch later on. My programme, I decided, would be to thread
the principal streets, talk with any non-natives I might encounter, and catch the eight o’clock
coach for Arkham. The town, I could see, formed a significant and exaggerated example of communal
decay; but being no sociologist I would limit my serious observations to the field of architecture.
Thus I began my systematic though half-bewildered tour of Innsmouth’s
narrow, shadow-blighted ways. Crossing the bridge and turning toward the roar of the lower falls,
I passed close to the Marsh refinery, which seemed oddly free from the noise of industry. This
building stood on the steep river bluff near a bridge and an open confluence of streets which
I took to be the earliest civic centre, displaced after the Revolution by the present Town Square.
Re-crossing the gorge on the Main Street bridge, I struck a region of utter
desertion which somehow made me shudder. Collapsing huddles of gambrel roofs formed a jagged
and fantastic skyline, above which rose the ghoulish, decapitated steeple of an ancient church.
Some houses along Main Street were tenanted, but most were tightly boarded up. Down unpaved
side streets I saw the black, gaping windows of deserted hovels, many of which leaned at perilous
and incredible angles through the sinking of part of the foundations. Those windows stared so
spectrally that it took courage to turn eastward toward the waterfront. Certainly, the terror
of a deserted house swells in geometrical rather than arithmetical progression as houses multiply
to form a city of stark desolation. The sight of such endless avenues of fishy-eyed vacancy
and death, and the thought of such linked infinities of black, brooding compartments given over
to cobwebs and memories and the conqueror worm, start up vestigial fears and aversions that
not even the stoutest philosophy can disperse.
Fish Street was as deserted as Main, though it differed in having many brick
and stone warehouses still in excellent shape. Water Street was almost its duplicate, save that
there were great seaward gaps where wharves had been. Not a living thing did I see, except for
the scattered fishermen on the distant breakwater, and not a sound did I hear save the lapping
of the harbour tides and the roar of the falls in the Manuxet. The town was getting more and
more on my nerves, and I looked behind me furtively as I picked my way back over the tottering
Water Street bridge. The Fish Street bridge, according to the sketch, was in ruins.
North of the river there were traces of squalid life—active fish-packing
houses in Water Street, smoking chimneys and patched roofs here and there, occasional sounds
from indeterminate sources, and infrequent shambling forms in the dismal streets and unpaved
lanes—but I seemed to find this even more oppressive than the southerly desertion. For
one thing, the people were more hideous and abnormal than those near the centre of the town;
so that I was several times evilly reminded of something utterly fantastic which I could not
quite place. Undoubtedly the alien strain in the Innsmouth folk was stronger here than farther
inland—unless, indeed, the “Innsmouth look” were a disease rather than a blood
strain, in which case this district might be held to harbour the more advanced cases.
One detail that annoyed me was the distribution of the few faint sounds
I heard. They ought naturally to have come wholly from the visibly inhabited houses, yet in
reality were often strongest inside the most rigidly boarded-up facades. There were creakings,
scurryings, and hoarse doubtful noises; and I thought uncomfortably about the hidden tunnels
suggested by the grocery boy. Suddenly I found myself wondering what the voices of those denizens
would be like. I had heard no speech so far in this quarter, and was unaccountably anxious not
to do so.
Pausing only long enough to look at two fine but ruinous old churches at Main
and Church Streets, I hastened out of that vile waterfront slum. My next logical goal was New
Church Green, but somehow or other I could not bear to repass the church in whose basement I
had glimpsed the inexplicably frightening form of that strangely diademed priest or pastor.
Besides, the grocery youth had told me that the churches, as well as the Order of Dagon Hall,
were not advisable neighbourhoods for strangers.
Accordingly I kept north along Main to Martin, then turning inland, crossing
Federal Street safely north of the Green, and entering the decayed patrician neighbourhood of
northern Broad, Washington, Lafayette, and Adams Streets. Though these stately old avenues were
ill-surfaced and unkempt, their elm-shaded dignity had not entirely departed. Mansion after
mansion claimed my gaze, most of them decrepit and boarded up amidst neglected grounds, but
one or two in each street shewing signs of occupancy. In Washington Street there was a row of
four or five in excellent repair and with finely tended lawns and gardens. The most sumptuous
of these—with wide terraced parterres extending back the whole way to Lafayette Street—I
took to be the home of Old Man Marsh, the afflicted refinery owner.
In all these streets no living thing was visible, and I wondered at the complete
absense of cats and dogs from Innsmouth. Another thing which puzzled and disturbed me, even
in some of the best-preserved mansions, was the tightly shuttered condition of many third-story
and attic windows. Furtiveness and secretiveness seemed universal in this hushed city of alienage
and death, and I could not escape the sensation of being watched from ambush on every hand by
sly, staring eyes that never shut.
I shivered as the cracked stroke of three sounded from a belfry on my left.
Too well did I recall the squat church from which those notes came. Following Washington Street
toward the river, I now faced a new zone of former industry and commerce; noting the ruins of
a factory ahead, and seeing others, with the traces of an old railway station and covered railway
bridge beyond, up the gorge on my right.
The uncertain bridge now before me was posted with a warning sign, but I took
the risk and crossed again to the south bank where traces of life reappeared. Furtive, shambling
creatures stared cryptically in my direction, and more normal faces eyed me coldly and curiously.
Innsmouth was rapidly becoming intolerable, and I turned down Paine Street toward the Square
in the hope of getting some vehicle to take me to Arkham before the still-distant starting-time
of that sinister bus.
It was then that I saw the tumbledown fire station on my left, and noticed
the red-faced, bushy-bearded, watery-eyed old man in nondescript rags who sat on a bench in
front of it talking with a pair of unkempt but not abnormal-looking firemen. This, of course,
must be Zadok Allen, the half-crazed, liquorish nonagenarian whose tales of old Innsmouth and
its shadow were so hideous and incredible.
III.
It must have been some imp of the perverse—or some sardonic pull from
dark, hidden sources—which made me change my plans as I did. I had long before resolved
to limit my observations to architecture alone, and I was even then hurrying toward the Square
in an effort to get quick transportation out of this festering city of death and decay; but
the sight of old Zadok Allen set up new currents in my mind and made me slacken my pace uncertainly.
I had been assured that the old man could do nothing but hint at wild, disjointed,
and incredible legends, and I had been warned that the natives made it unsafe to be seen talking
to him; yet the thought of this aged witness to the town’s decay, with memories going
back to the early days of ships and factories, was a lure that no amount of reason could make
me resist. After all, the strangest and maddest of myths are often merely symbols or allegories
based upon truth—and old Zadok must have seen everything which went on around Innsmouth
for the last ninety years. Curiosity flared up beyond sense and caution, and in my youthful
egotism I fancied I might be able to sift a nucleus of real history from the confused, extravagant
outpouring I would probably extract with the aid of raw whiskey.
I knew that I could not accost him then and there, for the firemen would surely
notice and object. Instead, I reflected, I would prepare by getting some bootleg liquor at a
place where the grocery boy had told me it was plentiful. Then I would loaf near the fire station
in apparent casualness, and fall in with old Zadok after he had started on one of his frequent
rambles. The youth said that he was very restless, seldom sitting around the station for more
than an hour or two at a time.
A quart bottle of whiskey was easily, though not cheaply, obtained in the rear
of a dingy variety-store just off the Square in Eliot Street. The dirty-looking fellow who waited
on me had a touch of the staring “Innsmouth look”, but was quite civil in his way;
being perhaps used to the custom of such convivial strangers—truckmen, gold-buyers, and
the like—as were occasionally in town.
Reëntering the Square I saw that luck was with me; for—shuffling
out of Paine Street around the corner of the Gilman House—I glimpsed nothing less than
the tall, lean, tattered form of old Zadok Allen himself. In accordance with my plan, I attracted
his attention by brandishing my newly purchased bottle; and soon realised that he had begun
to shuffle wistfully after me as I turned into Waite Street on my way to the most deserted region
I could think of.
I was steering my course by the map the grocery boy had prepared, and was aiming
for the wholly abandoned stretch of southern waterfront which I had previously visited. The
only people in sight there had been the fishermen on the distant breakwater; and by going a
few squares south I could get beyond the range of these, finding a pair of seats on some abandoned
wharf and being free to question old Zadok unobserved for an indefinite time. Before I reached
Main Street I could hear a faint and wheezy “Hey, Mister!” behind me, and I presently
allowed the old man to catch up and take copious pulls from the quart bottle.
I began putting out feelers as we walked along to Water Street and turned southward
amidst the omnipresent desolation and crazily tilted ruins, but found that the aged tongue did
not loosen as quickly as I had expected. At length I saw a grass-grown opening toward the sea
between crumbling brick walls, with the weedy length of an earth-and-masonry wharf projecting
beyond. Piles of moss-covered stones near the water promised tolerable seats, and the scene
was sheltered from all possible view by a ruined warehouse on the north. Here, I thought, was
the ideal place for a long secret colloquy; so I guided my companion down the lane and picked
out spots to sit in among the mossy stones. The air of death and desertion was ghoulish, and
the smell of fish almost insufferable; but I was resolved to let nothing deter me.
About four hours remained for conversation if I were to catch the eight o’clock
coach for Arkham, and I began to dole out more liquor to the ancient tippler; meanwhile eating
my own frugal lunch. In my donations I was careful not to overshoot the mark, for I did not
wish Zadok’s vinous garrulousness to pass into a stupor. After an hour his furtive taciturnity
shewed signs of disappearing, but much to my disappointment he still sidetracked my questions
about Innsmouth and its shadow-haunted past. He would babble of current topics, revealing a
wide acquaintance with newspapers and a great tendency to philosophise in a sententious village
fashion.
Toward the end of the second hour I feared my quart of whiskey would not be
enough to produce results, and was wondering whether I had better leave old Zadok and go back
for more. Just then, however, chance made the opening which my questions had been unable to
make; and the wheezing ancient’s rambling took a turn that caused me to lean forward and
listen alertly. My back was toward the fishy-smelling sea, but he was facing it, and something
or other had caused his wandering gaze to light on the low, distant line of Devil Reef, then
shewing plainly and almost fascinatingly above the waves. The sight seemed to displease him,
for he began a series of weak curses which ended in a confidential whisper and a knowing leer.
He bent toward me, took hold of my coat lapel, and hissed out some hints that could not be mistaken.
“Thar’s whar it all begun—that cursed place of all wickedness
whar the deep water starts. Gate o’ hell—sheer drop daown to a bottom no saoundin’-line
kin tech. Ol’ Cap’n Obed done it—him that faound aout more’n was good
fer him in the Saouth Sea islands.
“Everybody was in a bad way them days. Trade fallin’ off, mills
losin’ business—even the new ones—an’ the best of our menfolks kilt
a-privateerin’ in the War of 1812 or lost with the Elizy brig an’ the 
Ranger snow—both of ’em Gilman venters. Obed Marsh he had three ships afloat—brigantine
Columby, brig Hetty, an’ barque Sumatry Queen. He was the only one
as kep’ on with the East-Injy an’ Pacific trade, though Esdras Martin’s barkentine
Malay Pride made a venter as late as ’twenty-eight.
“Never was nobody like Cap’n Obed—old limb o’ Satan!
Heh, heh! I kin mind him a-tellin’ abaout furren parts, an’ callin’ all the
folks stupid fer goin’ to Christian meetin’ an’ bearin’ their burdens
meek an’ lowly. Says they’d orter git better gods like some o’ the folks in
the Injies—gods as ud bring ’em good fishin’ in return for their sacrifices,
an’ ud reely answer folks’s prayers.
“Matt Eliot, his fust mate, talked a lot, too, only he was agin’
folks’s doin’ any heathen things. Told abaout an island east of Otaheité
whar they was a lot o’ stone ruins older’n anybody knew anything abaout, kind o’
like them on Ponape, in the Carolines, but with carvin’s of faces that looked like the
big statues on Easter Island. They was a little volcanic island near thar, too, whar they was
other ruins with diff’rent carvin’s—ruins all wore away like they’d
ben under the sea onct, an’ with picters of awful monsters all over ’em.
“Wal, Sir, Matt he says the natives araound thar had all the fish they
cud ketch, an’ sported bracelets an’ armlets an’ head rigs made aout of a
queer kind o’ gold an’ covered with picters o’ monsters jest like the ones
carved over the ruins on the little island—sorter fish-like frogs or frog-like fishes
that was drawed in all kinds o’ positions like they was human bein’s. Nobody cud
git aout o’ them whar they got all the stuff, an’ all the other natives wondered
haow they managed to find fish in plenty even when the very next islands had lean pickin’s.
Matt he got to wonderin’ too, an’ so did Cap’n Obed. Obed he notices, besides,
that lots of the han’some young folks ud drop aout o’ sight fer good from year to
year, an’ that they wa’n’t many old folks araound. Also, he thinks some of
the folks looks durned queer even fer Kanakys.
“It took Obed to git the truth aout o’ them heathen. I dun’t
know haow he done it, but he begun by tradin’ fer the gold-like things they wore. Ast
’em whar they come from, an’ ef they cud git more, an’ finally wormed the
story aout o’ the old chief—Walakea, they called him. Nobody but Obed ud ever a
believed the old yeller devil, but the Cap’n cud read folks like they was books. Heh,
heh! Nobody never believes me naow when I tell ’em, an’ I dun’t s’pose
you will, young feller—though come to look at ye, ye hev kind o’ got them sharp-readin’
eyes like Obed had.”
The old man’s whisper grew fainter, and I found myself shuddering at
the terrible and sincere portentousness of his intonation, even though I knew his tale could
be nothing but drunken phantasy.
“Wal, Sir, Obed he larnt that they’s things on this arth as most
folks never heerd abaout—an’ wouldn’t believe ef they did hear. It seems these
Kanakys was sacrificin’ heaps o’ their young men an’ maidens to some kind
o’ god-things that lived under the sea, an’ gittin’ all kinds o’ favour
in return. They met the things on the little islet with the queer ruins, an’ it seems
them awful picters o’ frog-fish monsters was supposed to be picters o’ these things.
Mebbe they was the kind o’ critters as got all the mermaid stories an’ sech started.
They had all kinds o’ cities on the sea-bottom, an’ this island was heaved up from
thar. Seems they was some of the things alive in the stone buildin’s when the island come
up sudden to the surface. That’s haow the Kanakys got wind they was daown thar. Made sign-talk
as soon as they got over bein’ skeert, an’ pieced up a bargain afore long.
“Them things liked human sacrifices. Had had ’em ages afore, but
lost track o’ the upper world arter a time. What they done to the victims it ain’t
fer me to say, an’ I guess Obed wa’n’t none too sharp abaout askin’.
But it was all right with the heathens, because they’d ben havin’ a hard time an’
was desp’rate abaout everything. They give a sarten number o’ young folks to the
sea-things twict every year—May-Eve an’ Hallowe’en—reg’lar as
cud be. Also give some o’ the carved knick-knacks they made. What the things agreed to
give in return was plenty o’ fish—they druv ’em in from all over the sea—an’
a few gold-like things naow an’ then.
“Wal, as I says, the natives met the things on the little volcanic islet—goin’
thar in canoes with the sacrifices et cet’ry, and bringin’ back any of the gold-like
jools as was comin’ to ’em. At fust the things didn’t never go onto the main
island, but arter a time they come to want to. Seems they hankered arter mixin’ with the
folks, an’ havin’ j’int ceremonies on the big days—May-Eve an’
Hallowe’en. Ye see, they was able to live both in an’ aout o’ water—what
they call amphibians, I guess. The Kanakys told ’em as haow folks from the other islands
might wanta wipe ’em aout ef they got wind o’ their bein’ thar, but they says
they dun’t keer much, because they cud wipe aout the hull brood o’ humans ef they
was willin’ to bother—that is, any as didn’t hev sarten signs sech as was
used onct by the lost Old Ones, whoever they was. But not wantin’ to bother, they’d
lay low when anybody visited the island.
“When it come to matin’ with them toad-lookin’ fishes, the
Kanakys kind o’ balked, but finally they larnt something as put a new face on the matter.
Seems that human folks has got a kind o’ relation to sech water-beasts—that everything
alive come aout o’ the water onct, an’ only needs a little change to go back agin.
Them things told the Kanakys that ef they mixed bloods there’d be children as ud look
human at fust, but later turn more’n more like the things, till finally they’d take
to the water an’ jine the main lot o’ things daown thar. An’ this is the important
part, young feller—them as turned into fish things an’ went into the water wouldn’t
never die. Them things never died excep’ they was kilt violent.
“Wal, Sir, it seems by the time Obed knowed them islanders they was all
full o’ fish blood from them deep-water things. When they got old an’ begun to shew
it, they was kep’ hid until they felt like takin’ to the water an’ quittin’
the place. Some was more teched than others, an’ some never did change quite enough to
take to the water; but mostly they turned aout jest the way them things said. Them as was born
more like the things changed arly, but them as was nearly human sometimes stayed on the island
till they was past seventy, though they’d usually go daown under fer trial trips afore
that. Folks as had took to the water gen’rally come back a good deal to visit, so’s
a man ud often be a-talkin’ to his own five-times-great-grandfather, who’d left
the dry land a couple o’ hundred years or so afore.
“Everybody got aout o’ the idee o’ dyin’—excep’
in canoe wars with the other islanders, or as sacrifices to the sea-gods daown below, or from
snake-bite or plague or sharp gallopin’ ailments or somethin’ afore they cud take
to the water—but simply looked forrad to a kind o’ change that wa’n’t
a bit horrible arter a while. They thought what they’d got was well wuth all they’d
had to give up—an’ I guess Obed kind o’ come to think the same hisself when
he’d chewed over old Walakea’s story a bit. Walakea, though, was one of the few
as hadn’t got none of the fish blood—bein’ of a royal line that intermarried
with royal lines on other islands.
“Walakea he shewed Obed a lot o’ rites an’ incantations as
had to do with the sea-things, an’ let him see some o’ the folks in the village
as had changed a lot from human shape. Somehaow or other, though, he never would let him see
one of the reg’lar things from right aout o’ the water. In the end he give him a
funny kind o’ thingumajig made aout o’ lead or something, that he said ud bring
up the fish things from any place in the water whar they might be a nest of ’em. The idee
was to drop it daown with the right kind o’ prayers an’ sech. Walakea allaowed as
the things was scattered all over the world, so’s anybody that looked abaout cud find
a nest an’ bring ’em up ef they was wanted.
“Matt he didn’t like this business at all, an’ wanted Obed
shud keep away from the island; but the Cap’n was sharp fer gain, an’ faound he
cud git them gold-like things so cheap it ud pay him to make a specialty of ’em. Things
went on that way fer years, an’ Obed got enough o’ that gold-like stuff to make
him start the refinery in Waite’s old run-daown fullin’ mill. He didn’t dass
sell the pieces like they was, fer folks ud be all the time askin’ questions. All the
same his crews ud git a piece an’ dispose of it naow and then, even though they was swore
to keep quiet; an’ he let his women-folks wear some o’ the pieces as was more human-like
than most.
“Wal, come abaout ’thutty-eight—when I was seven year’
old—Obed he faound the island people all wiped aout between v’yages. Seems the other
islanders had got wind o’ what was goin’ on, an’ had took matters into their
own hands. S’pose they musta had, arter all, them old magic signs as the sea-things says
was the only things they was afeard of. No tellin’ what any o’ them Kanakys will
chance to git a holt of when the sea-bottom throws up some island with ruins older’n the
deluge. Pious cusses, these was—they didn’t leave nothin’ standin’ on
either the main island or the little volcanic islet excep’ what parts of the ruins was
too big to knock daown. In some places they was little stones strewed abaout—like charms—with
somethin’ on ’em like what ye call a swastika naowadays. Prob’ly them was
the Old Ones’ signs. Folks all wiped aout, no trace o’ no gold-like things, an’
none o’ the nearby Kanakys ud breathe a word abaout the matter. Wouldn’t even admit
they’d ever ben any people on that island.
“That naturally hit Obed pretty hard, seein’ as his normal trade
was doin’ very poor. It hit the whole of Innsmouth, too, because in seafarin’ days
what profited the master of a ship gen’lly profited the crew proportionate. Most o’
the folks araound the taown took the hard times kind o’ sheep-like an’ resigned,
but they was in bad shape because the fishin’ was peterin’ aout an’ the mills
wa’n’t doin’ none too well.
“Then’s the time Obed he begun a-cursin’ at the folks fer
bein’ dull sheep an’ prayin’ to a Christian heaven as didn’t help ’em
none. He told ’em he’d knowed of folks as prayed to gods that give somethin’
ye reely need, an’ says ef a good bunch o’ men ud stand by him, he cud mebbe git
a holt o’ sarten paowers as ud bring plenty o’ fish an’ quite a bit o’
gold. O’ course them as sarved on the Sumatry Queen an’ seed the island knowed
what he meant, an’ wa’n’t none too anxious to git clost to sea-things like
they’d heerd tell on, but them as didn’t know what ’twas all abaout got kind
o’ swayed by what Obed had to say, an’ begun to ast him what he cud do to set ’em
on the way to the faith as ud bring ’em results.”
Here the old man faltered, mumbled, and lapsed into a moody and apprehensive
silence; glancing nervously over his shoulder and then turning back to stare fascinatedly at
the distant black reef. When I spoke to him he did not answer, so I knew I would have to let
him finish the bottle. The insane yarn I was hearing interested me profoundly, for I fancied
there was contained within it a sort of crude allegory based upon the strangenesses of Innsmouth
and elaborated by an imagination at once creative and full of scraps of exotic legend. Not for
a moment did I believe that the tale had any really substantial foundation; but none the less
the account held a hint of genuine terror, if only because it brought in references to strange
jewels clearly akin to the malign tiara I had seen at Newburyport. Perhaps the ornaments had,
after all, come from some strange island; and possibly the wild stories were lies of the bygone
Obed himself rather than of this antique toper.
I handed Zadok the bottle, and he drained it to the last drop. It was curious
how he could stand so much whiskey, for not even a trace of thickness had come into his high,
wheezy voice. He licked the nose of the bottle and slipped it into his pocket, then beginning
to nod and whisper softly to himself. I bent close to catch any articulate words he might utter,
and thought I saw a sardonic smile behind the stained, bushy whiskers. Yes—he was really
forming words, and I could grasp a fair proportion of them.
“Poor Matt—Matt he allus was agin’ it—tried to line
up the folks on his side, an’ had long talks with the preachers—no use—they
run the Congregational parson aout o’ taown, an’ the Methodist feller quit—never
did see Resolved Babcock, the Baptist parson, agin—Wrath o’ Jehovy—I was a
mighty little critter, but I heerd what I heerd an’ seen what I seen—Dagon an’
Ashtoreth—Belial an’ Beëlzebub—Golden Caff an’ the idols o’
Canaan an’ the Philistines—Babylonish abominations—Mene, mene, tekel, upharsin—”
He stopped again, and from the look in his watery blue eyes I feared he was
close to a stupor after all. But when I gently shook his shoulder he turned on me with astonishing
alertness and snapped out some more obscure phrases.
“Dun’t believe me, hey? Heh, heh, heh—then jest tell me,
young feller, why Cap’n Obed an’ twenty odd other folks used to row aout to Devil
Reef in the dead o’ night an’ chant things so laoud ye cud hear ’em all over
taown when the wind was right? Tell me that, hey? An’ tell me why Obed was allus droppin’
heavy things daown into the deep water t’other side o’ the reef whar the bottom
shoots daown like a cliff lower’n ye kin saound? Tell me what he done with that funny-shaped
lead thingumajig as Walakea give him? Hey, boy? An’ what did they all haowl on May-Eve,
an’ agin the next Hallowe’en? An’ why’d the new church parsons—fellers
as used to be sailors—wear them queer robes an’ cover theirselves with them gold-like
things Obed brung? Hey?”
The watery blue eyes were almost savage and maniacal now, and the dirty white
beard bristled electrically. Old Zadok probably saw me shrink back, for he had begun to cackle evilly.
“Heh, heh, heh, heh! Beginnin’ to see, hey? Mebbe ye’d like
to a ben me in them days, when I seed things at night aout to sea from the cupalo top o’
my haouse. Oh, I kin tell ye, little pitchers hev big ears, an’ I wa’n’t missin’
nothin’ o’ what was gossiped abaout Cap’n Obed an’ the folks aout to
the reef! Heh, heh, heh! Haow abaout the night I took my pa’s ship’s glass up to
the cupalo an’ seed the reef a-bristlin’ thick with shapes that dove off quick soon’s
the moon riz? Obed an’ the folks was in a dory, but them shapes dove off the far side
into the deep water an’ never come up. . . . Haow’d ye like to be
a little shaver alone up in a cupalo a-watchin’ shapes as wa’n’t human
shapes? . . . Hey? . . . Heh, heh, heh, heh. . . .”
The old man was getting hysterical, and I began to shiver with a nameless alarm.
He laid a gnarled claw on my shoulder, and it seemed to me that its shaking was not altogether
that of mirth.
“S’pose one night ye seed somethin’ heavy heaved offen Obed’s
dory beyond the reef, an’ then larned nex’ day a young feller was missin’
from home? Hey? Did anybody ever see hide or hair o’ Hiram Gilman agin? Did they? An’
Nick Pierce, an’ Luelly Waite, an’ Adoniram Saouthwick, an’ Henry Garrison?
Hey? Heh, heh, heh, heh. . . . Shapes talkin’ sign language with their
hands . . . them as had reel hands. . . .
“Wal, Sir, that was the time Obed begun to git on his feet agin. Folks
see his three darters a-wearin’ gold-like things as nobody’d never see on ’em
afore, an’ smoke started comin’ aout o’ the refin’ry chimbly. Other
folks were prosp’rin’, too—fish begun to swarm into the harbour fit to kill,
an’ heaven knows what sized cargoes we begun to ship aout to Newb’ryport, Arkham,
an’ Boston. ’Twas then Obed got the ol’ branch railrud put through. Some Kingsport
fishermen heerd abaout the ketch an’ come up in sloops, but they was all lost. Nobody
never see ’em agin. An’ jest then our folks organised the Esoteric Order o’
Dagon, an’ bought Masonic Hall offen Calvary Commandery for it . . . heh,
heh, heh! Matt Eliot was a Mason an’ agin’ the sellin’, but he dropped aout
o’ sight jest then.
“Remember, I ain’t sayin’ Obed was set on hevin’ things
jest like they was on that Kanaky isle. I dun’t think he aimed at fust to do no mixin’,
nor raise no younguns to take to the water an’ turn into fishes with eternal life. He
wanted them gold things, an’ was willin’ to pay heavy, an’ I guess the 
others was satisfied fer a while. . . .
“Come in ’forty-six the taown done some lookin’ an’
thinkin’ fer itself. Too many folks missin’—too much wild preachin’
at meetin’ of a Sunday—too much talk abaout that reef. I guess I done a bit by tellin’
Selectman Mowry what I see from the cupalo. They was a party one night as follered Obed’s
craowd aout to the reef, an’ I heerd shots betwixt the dories. Nex’ day Obed an’
thutty-two others was in gaol, with everbody a-wonderin’ jest what was afoot an’
jest what charge agin’ ’em cud be got to holt. God, ef anybody’d look’d
ahead . . . a couple o’ weeks later, when nothin’ had ben throwed
into the sea fer that long. . . .”
Zadok was shewing signs of fright and exhaustion, and I let him keep silence
for a while, though glancing apprehensively at my watch. The tide had turned and was coming
in now, and the sound of the waves seemed to arouse him. I was glad of that tide, for at high
water the fishy smell might not be so bad. Again I strained to catch his whispers.
“That awful night . . . I seed ’em . . .
I was up in the cupalo . . . hordes of ’em . . . swarms
of ’em . . . all over the reef an’ swimmin’ up the harbour
into the Manuxet. . . . God, what happened in the streets of Innsmouth that night . . .
they rattled our door, but pa wouldn’t open . . . then he clumb aout the
kitchen winder with his musket to find Selectman Mowry an’ see what he cud do. . . .
Maounds o’ the dead an’ the dyin’ . . . shots an’ screams . . .
shaoutin’ in Ol’ Squar an’ Taown Squar an’ New Church Green . . .
gaol throwed open . . . proclamation . . . treason . . .
called it the plague when folks come in an’ faound haff our people missin’ . . .
nobody left but them as ud jine in with Obed an’ them things or else keep quiet . . .
never heerd o’ my pa no more. . . .”
The old man was panting, and perspiring profusely. His grip on my shoulder
tightened.
“Everything cleaned up in the mornin’—but they was traces. . . .
Obed he kinder takes charge an’ says things is goin’ to be changed . . .
others’ll worship with us at meetin’-time, an’ sarten haouses hez got
to entertain guests . . . they wanted to mix like they done with the
Kanakys, an’ he fer one didn’t feel baound to stop ’em. Far gone, was Obed . . .
jest like a crazy man on the subjeck. He says they brung us fish an’ treasure, an’
shud hev what they hankered arter. . . .
“Nothin’ was to be diff’runt on the aoutside, only we was
to keep shy o’ strangers ef we knowed what was good fer us. We all hed to take the Oath
o’ Dagon, an’ later on they was secon’ an’ third Oaths that some on
us took. Them as ud help special, ud git special rewards—gold an’ sech— No
use balkin’, fer they was millions of ’em daown thar. They’d ruther not start
risin’ an’ wipin’ aout humankind, but ef they was gave away an’ forced
to, they cud do a lot toward jest that. We didn’t hev them old charms to cut ’em
off like folks in the Saouth Sea did, an’ them Kanakys wudn’t never give away their
secrets.
“Yield up enough sacrifices an’ savage knick-knacks an’ harbourage
in the taown when they wanted it, an’ they’d let well enough alone. Wudn’t
bother no strangers as might bear tales aoutside—that is, withaout they got pryin’.
All in the band of the faithful—Order o’ Dagon—an’ the children shud
never die, but go back to the Mother Hydra an’ Father Dagon what we all come from onct—Iä!
Iä! Cthulhu fhtagn! Ph’nglui mglw’nafh Cthulhu R’lyeh wgah-nagl fhtagn—”
Old Zadok was fast lapsing into stark raving, and I held my breath. Poor old
soul—to what pitiful depths of hallucination had his liquor, plus his hatred of the decay,
alienage, and disease around him, brought that fertile, imaginative brain! He began to moan
now, and tears were coursing down his channelled cheeks into the depths of his beard.
“God, what I seen senct I was fifteen year’ old—Mene,
mene, tekel, upharsin!—the folks as was missin’, an’ them as kilt theirselves—them
as told things in Arkham or Ipswich or sech places was all called crazy, like you’re a-callin’
me right naow—but God, what I seen— They’d a kilt me long ago fer what I know,
only I’d took the fust an’ secon’ Oaths o’ Dagon offen Obed, so was
pertected unlessen a jury of ’em proved I told things knowin’ an’ delib’rit . . .
but I wudn’t take the third Oath—I’d a died ruther’n take that—
“It got wuss araound Civil War time, when children born senct ’forty-six
begun to grow up—some of ’em, that is. I was afeard—never did no pryin’
arter that awful night, an’ never see one of—them—clost to in all my
life. That is, never no full-blooded one. I went to the war, an’ ef I’d a had any
guts or sense I’d a never come back, but settled away from here. But folks wrote me things
wa’n’t so bad. That, I s’pose, was because gov’munt draft men was in
taown arter ’sixty-three. Arter the war it was jest as bad agin. People begun to fall
off—mills an’ shops shet daown—shippin’ stopped an’ the harbour
choked up—railrud give up—but they . . . they never stopped
swimmin’ in an’ aout o’ the river from that cursed reef o’ Satan—an’
more an’ more attic winders got a-boarded up, an’ more an’ more noises was
heerd in haouses as wa’n’t s’posed to hev nobody in ’em. . . .
“Folks aoutside hev their stories abaout us—s’pose you’ve
heerd a plenty on ’em, seein’ what questions ye ast—stories abaout things
they’ve seed naow an’ then, an’ abaout that queer joolry as still comes in
from somewhars an’ ain’t quite all melted up—but nothin’ never gits
def’nite. Nobody’ll believe nothin’. They call them gold-like things pirate
loot, an’ allaow the Innsmouth folks hez furren blood or is distempered or somethin’.
Besides, them that lives here shoo off as many strangers as they kin, an’ encourage the
rest not to git very cur’ous, specially raound night time. Beasts balk at the critters—hosses
wuss’n mules—but when they got autos that was all right.
“In ’forty-six Cap’n Obed took a second wife that nobody
in the taown never see—some says he didn’t want to, but was made to by them
as he’d called in—had three children by her—two as disappeared young, but
one gal as looked like anybody else an’ was eddicated in Europe. Obed finally got her
married off by a trick to an Arkham feller as didn’t suspect nothin’. But nobody
aoutside’ll hev nothin’ to do with Innsmouth folks naow. Barnabas Marsh that runs
the refin’ry naow is Obed’s grandson by his fust wife—son of Onesiphorus,
his eldest son, but his mother was another o’ them as wa’n’t never seed
aoutdoors.
“Right naow Barnabas is abaout changed. Can’t shet his eyes no
more, an’ is all aout o’ shape. They say he still wears clothes, but he’ll
take to the water soon. Mebbe he’s tried it already—they do sometimes go daown fer
little spells afore they go fer good. Ain’t ben seed abaout in public fer nigh on ten
year’. Dun’t know haow his poor wife kin feel—she come from Ipswich, an’
they nigh lynched Barnabas when he courted her fifty odd year’ ago. Obed he died in ’seventy-eight,
an’ all the next gen’ration is gone naow—the fust wife’s children dead,
an’ the rest . . . God knows. . . .”
The sound of the incoming tide was now very insistent, and little by little
it seemed to change the old man’s mood from maudlin tearfulness to watchful fear. He would
pause now and then to renew those nervous glances over his shoulder or out toward the reef,
and despite the wild absurdity of his tale, I could not help beginning to share his vague apprehensiveness.
Zadok now grew shriller, and seemed to be trying to whip up his courage with louder speech.
“Hey, yew, why dun’t ye say somethin’? Haow’d ye like
to be livin’ in a taown like this, with everything a-rottin’ an’ a-dyin’,
an’ boarded-up monsters crawlin’ an’ bleatin’ an’ barkin’
an’ hoppin’ araoun’ black cellars an’ attics every way ye turn? Hey?
Haow’d ye like to hear the haowlin’ night arter night from the churches an’
Order o’ Dagon Hall, an’ know what’s doin’ part o’ the haowlin’?
Haow’d ye like to hear what comes from that awful reef every May-Eve an’ Hallowmass?
Hey? Think the old man’s crazy, eh? Wal, Sir, let me tell ye that ain’t the wust!”
Zadok was really screaming now, and the mad frenzy of his voice disturbed me
more than I care to own.
“Curse ye, dun’t set thar a-starin’ at me with them eyes—I
tell Obed Marsh he’s in hell, an’ hez got to stay thar! Heh, heh . . .
in hell, I says! Can’t git me—I hain’t done nothin’ nor told nobody
nothin’—
“Oh, you, young feller? Wal, even ef I hain’t told nobody nothin’
yet, I’m a-goin’ to naow! You jest set still an’ listen to me, boy—this
is what I ain’t never told nobody. . . . I says I didn’t do no pryin’
arter that night—but I faound things aout jest the same!
“Yew want to know what the reel horror is, hey? Wal, it’s this—it
ain’t what them fish devils hez done, but what they’re a-goin’ to do!
They’re a-bringin’ things up aout o’ whar they come from into the taown—ben
doin’ it fer years, an’ slackenin’ up lately. Them haouses north o’
the river betwixt Water an’ Main Streets is full of ’em—them devils an’
what they brung—an’ when they git ready. . . . I say, when
they git ready . . . ever hear tell of a shoggoth? . . .
“Hey, d’ye hear me? I tell ye I know what them things be—I
seen ’em one night when . . . EH—AHHHH—AH! E’YAAHHHH. . . .”
The hideous suddenness and inhuman frightfulness of the old man’s shriek
almost made me faint. His eyes, looking past me toward the malodorous sea, were positively starting
from his head; while his face was a mask of fear worthy of Greek tragedy. His bony claw dug
monstrously into my shoulder, and he made no motion as I turned my head to look at whatever
he had glimpsed.
There was nothing that I could see. Only the incoming tide, with perhaps one
set of ripples more local than the long-flung line of breakers. But now Zadok was shaking me,
and I turned back to watch the melting of that fear-frozen face into a chaos of twitching eyelids
and mumbling gums. Presently his voice came back—albeit as a trembling whisper.
“Git aout o’ here! Git aout o’ here! They seen
us—git aout fer your life! Dun’t wait fer nothin’—they know naow—
Run fer it—quick—aout o’ this taown—”
Another heavy wave dashed against the loosening masonry of the bygone wharf,
and changed the mad ancient’s whisper to another inhuman and blood-curdling scream.
“E—YAAHHHH! . . . YHAAAAAAA! . . .”
Before I could recover my scattered wits he had relaxed his clutch on my shoulder
and dashed wildly inland toward the street, reeling northward around the ruined warehouse wall.
I glanced back at the sea, but there was nothing there. And when I reached
Water Street and looked along it toward the north there was no remaining trace of Zadok Allen.
IV.
I can hardly describe the mood in which I was left by this harrowing episode—an
episode at once mad and pitiful, grotesque and terrifying. The grocery boy had prepared me for
it, yet the reality left me none the less bewildered and disturbed. Puerile though the story
was, old Zadok’s insane earnestness and horror had communicated to me a mounting unrest
which joined with my earlier sense of loathing for the town and its blight of intangible shadow.
Later I might sift the tale and extract some nucleus of historic allegory;
just now I wished to put it out of my head. The hour had grown perilously late—my watch
said 7:15, and the Arkham bus left Town Square at eight—so I tried to give my thoughts
as neutral and practical a cast as possible, meanwhile walking rapidly through the deserted
streets of gaping roofs and leaning houses toward the hotel where I had checked my valise and
would find my bus.
Though the golden light of late afternoon gave the ancient roofs and decrepit
chimneys an air of mystic loveliness and peace, I could not help glancing over my shoulder now
and then. I would surely be very glad to get out of malodorous and fear-shadowed Innsmouth,
and wished there were some other vehicle than the bus driven by that sinister-looking fellow
Sargent. Yet I did not hurry too precipitately, for there were architectural details worth viewing
at every silent corner; and I could easily, I calculated, cover the necessary distance in a
half-hour.
Studying the grocery youth’s map and seeking a route I had not traversed
before, I chose Marsh Street instead of State for my approach to Town Square. Near the corner
of Fall Street I began to see scattered groups of furtive whisperers, and when I finally reached
the Square I saw that almost all the loiterers were congregated around the door of the Gilman
House. It seemed as if many bulging, watery, unwinking eyes looked oddly at me as I claimed
my valise in the lobby, and I hoped that none of these unpleasant creatures would be my fellow-passengers
on the coach.
The bus, rather early, rattled in with three passengers somewhat before eight,
and an evil-looking fellow on the sidewalk muttered a few indistinguishable words to the driver.
Sargent threw out a mail-bag and a roll of newspapers, and entered the hotel; while the passengers—the
same men whom I had seen arriving in Newburyport that morning—shambled to the sidewalk
and exchanged some faint guttural words with a loafer in a language I could have sworn was not
English. I boarded the empty coach and took the same seat I had taken before, but was hardly
settled before Sargent reappeared and began mumbling in a throaty voice of peculiar repulsiveness.
I was, it appeared, in very bad luck. There had been something wrong with the
engine, despite the excellent time made from Newburyport, and the bus could not complete the
journey to Arkham. No, it could not possibly be repaired that night, nor was there any other
way of getting transportation out of Innsmouth, either to Arkham or elsewhere. Sargent was sorry,
but I would have to stop over at the Gilman. Probably the clerk would make the price easy for
me, but there was nothing else to do. Almost dazed by this sudden obstacle, and violently dreading
the fall of night in this decaying and half-unlighted town, I left the bus and reëntered
the hotel lobby; where the sullen, queer-looking night clerk told me I could have Room 428 on
next the top floor—large, but without running water—for a dollar.
Despite what I had heard of this hotel in Newburyport, I signed the register,
paid my dollar, let the clerk take my valise, and followed that sour, solitary attendant up
three creaking flights of stairs past dusty corridors which seemed wholly devoid of life. My
room, a dismal rear one with two windows and bare, cheap furnishings, overlooked a dingy courtyard
otherwise hemmed in by low, deserted brick blocks, and commanded a view of decrepit westward-stretching
roofs with a marshy countryside beyond. At the end of the corridor was a bathroom—a discouraging
relique with ancient marble bowl, tin tub, faint electric light, and musty wooden panelling
around all the plumbing fixtures.
It being still daylight, I descended to the Square and looked around for a
dinner of some sort; noticing as I did so the strange glances I received from the unwholesome
loafers. Since the grocery was closed, I was forced to patronise the restaurant I had shunned
before; a stooped, narrow-headed man with staring, unwinking eyes, and a flat-nosed wench with
unbelievably thick, clumsy hands being in attendance. The service was of the counter type,
and it relieved me to find that much was evidently served from cans and packages. A bowl of
vegetable soup with crackers was enough for me, and I soon headed back for my cheerless room
at the Gilman; getting an evening paper and a flyspecked magazine from the evil-visaged clerk
at the rickety stand beside his desk.
As twilight deepened I turned on the one feeble electric bulb over the cheap,
iron-framed bed, and tried as best I could to continue the reading I had begun. I felt it advisable
to keep my mind wholesomely occupied, for it would not do to brood over the abnormalities of
this ancient, blight-shadowed town while I was still within its borders. The insane yarn I had
heard from the aged drunkard did not promise very pleasant dreams, and I felt I must keep the
image of his wild, watery eyes as far as possible from my imagination.
Also, I must not dwell on what that factory inspector had told the Newburyport
ticket-agent about the Gilman House and the voices of its nocturnal tenants—not on that,
nor on the face beneath the tiara in the black church doorway; the face for whose horror my
conscious mind could not account. It would perhaps have been easier to keep my thoughts from
disturbing topics had the room not been so gruesomely musty. As it was, the lethal mustiness
blended hideously with the town’s general fishy odour and persistently focussed one’s
fancy on death and decay.
Another thing that disturbed me was the absence of a bolt on the door of my
room. One had been there, as marks clearly shewed, but there were signs of recent removal. No
doubt it had become out of order, like so many other things in this decrepit edifice. In my
nervousness I looked around and discovered a bolt on the clothes-press which seemed to be of
the same size, judging from the marks, as the one formerly on the door. To gain a partial relief
from the general tension I busied myself by transferring this hardware to the vacant place with
the aid of a handy three-in-one device including a screw-driver which I kept on my key-ring.
The bolt fitted perfectly, and I was somewhat relieved when I knew that I could shoot it firmly
upon retiring. Not that I had any real apprehension of its need, but that any symbol of security
was welcome in an environment of this kind. There were adequate bolts on the two lateral doors
to connecting rooms, and these I proceeded to fasten.
I did not undress, but decided to read till I was sleepy and then lie down
with only my coat, collar, and shoes off. Taking a pocket flashlight from my valise, I placed
it in my trousers, so that I could read my watch if I woke up later in the dark. Drowsiness,
however, did not come; and when I stopped to analyse my thoughts I found to my disquiet that
I was really unconsciously listening for something—listening for something which I dreaded
but could not name. That inspector’s story must have worked on my imagination more deeply
than I had suspected. Again I tried to read, but found that I made no progress.
After a time I seemed to hear the stairs and corridors creak at intervals as
if with footsteps, and wondered if the other rooms were beginning to fill up. There were no
voices, however, and it struck me that there was something subtly furtive about the creaking.
I did not like it, and debated whether I had better try to sleep at all. This town had some
queer people, and there had undoubtedly been several disappearances. Was this one of those inns
where travellers were slain for their money? Surely I had no look of excessive prosperity. Or
were the townsfolk really so resentful about curious visitors? Had my obvious sightseeing, with
its frequent map-consultations, aroused unfavourable notice? It occurred to me that I must be
in a highly nervous state to let a few random creakings set me off speculating in this fashion—but
I regretted none the less that I was unarmed.
At length, feeling a fatigue which had nothing of drowsiness in it, I bolted
the newly outfitted hall door, turned off the light, and threw myself down on the hard, uneven
bed—coat, collar, shoes, and all. In the darkness every faint noise of the night seemed
magnified, and a flood of doubly unpleasant thoughts swept over me. I was sorry I had put out
the light, yet was too tired to rise and turn it on again. Then, after a long, dreary interval,
and prefaced by a fresh creaking of stairs and corridor, there came that soft, damnably unmistakable
sound which seemed like a malign fulfilment of all my apprehensions. Without the least shadow
of a doubt, the lock on my hall door was being tried—cautiously, furtively, tentatively—with
a key.
My sensations upon recognising this sign of actual peril were perhaps less
rather than more tumultuous because of my previous vague fears. I had been, albeit without definite
reason, instinctively on my guard—and that was to my advantage in the new and real crisis,
whatever it might turn out to be. Nevertheless the change in the menace from vague premonition
to immediate reality was a profound shock, and fell upon me with the force of a genuine blow.
It never once occurred to me that the fumbling might be a mere mistake. Malign purpose was all
I could think of, and I kept deathly quiet, awaiting the would-be intruder’s next move.
After a time the cautious rattling ceased, and I heard the room to the north
entered with a pass-key. Then the lock of the connecting door to my room was softly tried. The
bolt held, of course, and I heard the floor creak as the prowler left the room. After a moment
there came another soft rattling, and I knew that the room to the south of me was being entered.
Again a furtive trying of a bolted connecting door, and again a receding creaking. This time
the creaking went along the hall and down the stairs, so I knew that the prowler had realised
the bolted condition of my doors and was giving up his attempt for a greater or lesser time,
as the future would shew.
The readiness with which I fell into a plan of action proves that I must have
been subconsciously fearing some menace and considering possible avenues of escape for hours.
From the first I felt that the unseen fumbler meant a danger not to be met or dealt with, but
only to be fled from as precipitately as possible. The one thing to do was to get out of that
hotel alive as quickly as I could, and through some channel other than the front stairs and
lobby.
Rising softly and throwing my flashlight on the switch, I sought to light the
bulb over my bed in order to choose and pocket some belongings for a swift, valiseless flight.
Nothing, however, happened; and I saw that the power had been cut off. Clearly, some cryptic,
evil movement was afoot on a large scale—just what, I could not say. As I stood pondering
with my hand on the now useless switch I heard a muffled creaking on the floor below, and thought
I could barely distinguish voices in conversation. A moment later I felt less sure that the
deeper sounds were voices, since the apparent hoarse barkings and loose-syllabled croakings
bore so little resemblance to recognised human speech. Then I thought with renewed force of
what the factory inspector had heard in the night in this mouldering and pestilential building.
Having filled my pockets with the flashlight’s aid, I put on my hat and
tiptoed to the windows to consider chances of descent. Despite the state’s safety regulations
there was no fire escape on this side of the hotel, and I saw that my windows commanded only
a sheer three-story drop to the cobbled courtyard. On the right and left, however, some ancient
brick business blocks abutted on the hotel; their slant roofs coming up to a reasonable jumping
distance from my fourth-story level. To reach either of these lines of buildings I would have
to be in a room two doors from my own—in one case on the north and in the other case on
the south—and my mind instantly set to work calculating what chances I had of making the
transfer.
I could not, I decided, risk an emergence into the corridor; where my footsteps
would surely be heard, and where the difficulties of entering the desired room would be insuperable.
My progress, if it was to be made at all, would have to be through the less solidly built connecting
doors of the rooms; the locks and bolts of which I would have to force violently, using my shoulder
as a battering-ram whenever they were set against me. This, I thought, would be possible owing
to the rickety nature of the house and its fixtures; but I realised I could not do it noiselessly.
I would have to count on sheer speed, and the chance of getting to a window before any hostile
forces became coördinated enough to open the right door toward me with a pass-key. My
own outer door I reinforced by pushing the bureau against it—little by little, in order
to make a minimum of sound.
I perceived that my chances were very slender, and was fully prepared for any
calamity. Even getting to another roof would not solve the problem, for there would then remain
the task of reaching the ground and escaping from the town. One thing in my favour was the deserted
and ruinous state of the abutting buildings, and the number of skylights gaping blackly open
in each row.
Gathering from the grocery boy’s map that the best route out of town
was southward, I glanced first at the connecting door on the south side of the room. It was
designed to open in my direction, hence I saw—after drawing the bolt and finding other
fastenings in place—it was not a favourable one for forcing. Accordingly abandoning it
as a route, I cautiously moved the bedstead against it to hamper any attack which might be made
on it later from the next room. The door on the north was hung to open away from me, and this—though
a test proved it to be locked or bolted from the other side—I knew must be my route. If
I could gain the roofs of the buildings in Paine Street and descend successfully to the ground
level, I might perhaps dart through the courtyard and the adjacent or opposite buildings to
Washington or Bates—or else emerge in Paine and edge around southward into Washington.
In any case, I would aim to strike Washington somehow and get quickly out of the Town Square
region. My preference would be to avoid Paine, since the fire station there might be open all
night.
As I thought of these things I looked out over the squalid sea of decaying
roofs below me, now brightened by the beams of a moon not much past full. On the right the black
gash of the river-gorge clove the panorama; abandoned factories and railway station clinging
barnacle-like to its sides. Beyond it the rusted railway and the Rowley road led off through
a flat, marshy terrain dotted with islets of higher and dryer scrub-grown land. On the left
the creek-threaded countryside was nearer, the narrow road to Ipswich gleaming white in the
moonlight. I could not see from my side of the hotel the southward route toward Arkham which
I had determined to take.
I was irresolutely speculating on when I had better attack the northward door,
and on how I could least audibly manage it, when I noticed that the vague noises underfoot had
given place to a fresh and heavier creaking of the stairs. A wavering flicker of light shewed
through my transom, and the boards of the corridor began to groan with a ponderous load. Muffled
sounds of possible vocal origin approached, and at length a firm knock came at my outer door.
For a moment I simply held my breath and waited. Eternities seemed to elapse,
and the nauseous fishy odour of my environment seemed to mount suddenly and spectacularly. Then
the knocking was repeated—continuously, and with growing insistence. I knew that the time
for action had come, and forthwith drew the bolt of the northward connecting door, bracing myself
for the task of battering it open. The knocking waxed louder, and I hoped that its volume would
cover the sound of my efforts. At last beginning my attempt, I lunged again and again at the
thin panelling with my left shoulder, heedless of shock or pain. The door resisted even more
than I had expected, but I did not give in. And all the while the clamour at the outer door
increased.
Finally the connecting door gave, but with such a crash that I knew those outside
must have heard. Instantly the outside knocking became a violent battering, while keys sounded
ominously in the hall doors of the rooms on both sides of me. Rushing through the newly opened
connexion, I succeeded in bolting the northerly hall door before the lock could be turned; but
even as I did so I heard the hall door of the third room—the one from whose window I had
hoped to reach the roof below—being tried with a pass-key.
For an instant I felt absolute despair, since my trapping in a chamber with
no window egress seemed complete. A wave of almost abnormal horror swept over me, and invested
with a terrible but unexplainable singularity the flashlight-glimpsed dust prints made by the
intruder who had lately tried my door from this room. Then, with a dazed automatism which persisted
despite hopelessness, I made for the next connecting door and performed the blind motion of
pushing at it in an effort to get through and—granting that fastenings might be as providentially
intact as in this second room—bolt the hall door beyond before the lock could be turned
from outside.
Sheer fortunate chance gave me my reprieve—for the connecting door before
me was not only unlocked but actually ajar. In a second I was through, and had my right knee
and shoulder against a hall door which was visibly opening inward. My pressure took the opener
off guard, for the thing shut as I pushed, so that I could slip the well-conditioned bolt as
I had done with the other door. As I gained this respite I heard the battering at the two other
doors abate, while a confused clatter came from the connecting door I had shielded with the
bedstead. Evidently the bulk of my assailants had entered the southerly room and were massing
in a lateral attack. But at the same moment a pass-key sounded in the next door to the north,
and I knew that a nearer peril was at hand.
The northward connecting door was wide open, but there was no time to think
about checking the already turning lock in the hall. All I could do was to shut and bolt the
open connecting door, as well as its mate on the opposite side—pushing a bedstead against
the one and a bureau against the other, and moving a washstand in front of the hall door. I
must, I saw, trust to such makeshift barriers to shield me till I could get out the window and
on the roof of the Paine Street block. But even in this acute moment my chief horror was something
apart from the immediate weakness of my defences. I was shuddering because not one of my pursuers,
despite some hideous pantings, gruntings, and subdued barkings at odd intervals, was uttering
an unmuffled or intelligible vocal sound.
As I moved the furniture and rushed toward the windows I heard a frightful
scurrying along the corridor toward the room north of me, and perceived that the southward battering
had ceased. Plainly, most of my opponents were about to concentrate against the feeble connecting
door which they knew must open directly on me. Outside, the moon played on the ridgepole of
the block below, and I saw that the jump would be desperately hazardous because of the steep
surface on which I must land.
Surveying the conditions, I chose the more southerly of the two windows as
my avenue of escape; planning to land on the inner slope of the roof and make for the nearest
skylight. Once inside one of the decrepit brick structures I would have to reckon with pursuit;
but I hoped to descend and dodge in and out of yawning doorways along the shadowed courtyard,
eventually getting to Washington Street and slipping out of town toward the south.
The clatter at the northerly connecting door was now terrific, and I saw that
the weak panelling was beginning to splinter. Obviously, the besiegers had brought some ponderous
object into play as a battering-ram. The bedstead, however, still held firm; so that I had at
least a faint chance of making good my escape. As I opened the window I noticed that it was
flanked by heavy velour draperies suspended from a pole by brass rings, and also that there
was a large projecting catch for the shutters on the exterior. Seeing a possible means of avoiding
the dangerous jump, I yanked at the hangings and brought them down, pole and all; then quickly
hooking two of the rings in the shutter catch and flinging the drapery outside. The heavy folds
reached fully to the abutting roof, and I saw that the rings and catch would be likely to bear
my weight. So, climbing out of the window and down the improvised rope ladder, I left behind
me forever the morbid and horror-infested fabric of the Gilman House.
I landed safely on the loose slates of the steep roof, and succeeded in gaining
the gaping black skylight without a slip. Glancing up at the window I had left, I observed it
was still dark, though far across the crumbling chimneys to the north I could see lights ominously
blazing in the Order of Dagon Hall, the Baptist church, and the Congregational church which
I recalled so shiveringly. There had seemed to be no one in the courtyard below, and I hoped
there would be a chance to get away before the spreading of a general alarm. Flashing my pocket
lamp into the skylight, I saw that there were no steps down. The distance was slight, however,
so I clambered over the brink and dropped; striking a dusty floor littered with crumbling boxes
and barrels.
The place was ghoulish-looking, but I was past minding such impressions and
made at once for the staircase revealed by my flashlight—after a hasty glance at my watch,
which shewed the hour to be 2 a.m. The steps creaked, but seemed tolerably sound; and I raced
down past a barn-like second story to the ground floor. The desolation was complete, and only
echoes answered my footfalls. At length I reached the lower hall, at one end of which I saw
a faint luminous rectangle marking the ruined Paine Street doorway. Heading the other way, I
found the back door also open; and darted out and down five stone steps to the grass-grown cobblestones
of the courtyard.
The moonbeams did not reach down here, but I could just see my way about without
using the flashlight. Some of the windows on the Gilman House side were faintly glowing, and
I thought I heard confused sounds within. Walking softly over to the Washington Street side
I perceived several open doorways, and chose the nearest as my route out. The hallway inside
was black, and when I reached the opposite end I saw that the street door was wedged immovably
shut. Resolved to try another building, I groped my way back toward the courtyard, but stopped
short when close to the doorway.
For out of an opened door in the Gilman House a large crowd of doubtful shapes
was pouring—lanterns bobbing in the darkness, and horrible croaking voices exchanging
low cries in what was certainly not English. The figures moved uncertainly, and I realised to
my relief that they did not know where I had gone; but for all that they sent a shiver of horror
through my frame. Their features were indistinguishable, but their crouching, shambling gait
was abominably repellent. And worst of all, I perceived that one figure was strangely robed,
and unmistakably surmounted by a tall tiara of a design altogether too familiar. As the figures
spread throughout the courtyard, I felt my fears increase. Suppose I could find no egress from
this building on the street side? The fishy odour was detestable, and I wondered I could stand
it without fainting. Again groping toward the street, I opened a door off the hall and came
upon an empty room with closely shuttered but sashless windows. Fumbling in the rays of my flashlight,
I found I could open the shutters; and in another moment had climbed outside and was carefully
closing the aperture in its original manner.
I was now in Washington Street, and for the moment saw no living thing nor
any light save that of the moon. From several directions in the distance, however, I could hear
the sound of hoarse voices, of footsteps, and of a curious kind of pattering which did not sound
quite like footsteps. Plainly I had no time to lose. The points of the compass were clear to
me, and I was glad that all the street-lights were turned off, as is often the custom on strongly
moonlit nights in unprosperous rural regions. Some of the sounds came from the south, yet I
retained my design of escaping in that direction. There would, I knew, be plenty of deserted
doorways to shelter me in case I met any person or group who looked like pursuers.
I walked rapidly, softly, and close to the ruined houses. While hatless and
dishevelled after my arduous climb, I did not look especially noticeable; and stood a good chance
of passing unheeded if forced to encounter any casual wayfarer. At Bates Street I drew into
a yawning vestibule while two shambling figures crossed in front of me, but was soon on my way
again and approaching the open space where Eliot Street obliquely crosses Washington at the
intersection of South. Though I had never seen this space, it had looked dangerous to me on
the grocery youth’s map; since the moonlight would have free play there. There was no
use trying to evade it, for any alternative course would involve detours of possibly disastrous
visibility and delaying effect. The only thing to do was to cross it boldly and openly; imitating
the typical shamble of the Innsmouth folk as best I could, and trusting that no one—or
at least no pursuer of mine—would be there.
Just how fully the pursuit was organised—and indeed, just what its purpose
might be—I could form no idea. There seemed to be unusual activity in the town, but I
judged that the news of my escape from the Gilman had not yet spread. I would, of course, soon
have to shift from Washington to some other southward street; for that party from the hotel
would doubtless be after me. I must have left dust prints in that last old building, revealing
how I had gained the street.
The open space was, as I had expected, strongly moonlit; and I saw the remains
of a park-like, iron-railed green in its centre. Fortunately no one was about, though a curious
sort of buzz or roar seemed to be increasing in the direction of Town Square. South Street was
very wide, leading directly down a slight declivity to the waterfront and commanding a long
view out at sea; and I hoped that no one would be glancing up it from afar as I crossed in the
bright moonlight.
My progress was unimpeded, and no fresh sound arose to hint that I had been
spied. Glancing about me, I involuntarily let my pace slacken for a second to take in the sight
of the sea, gorgeous in the burning moonlight at the street’s end. Far out beyond the
breakwater was the dim, dark line of Devil Reef, and as I glimpsed it I could not help thinking
of all the hideous legends I had heard in the last thirty-four hours—legends which portrayed
this ragged rock as a veritable gateway to realms of unfathomed horror and inconceivable abnormality.
Then, without warning, I saw the intermittent flashes of light on the distant
reef. They were definite and unmistakable, and awaked in my mind a blind horror beyond all rational
proportion. My muscles tightened for panic flight, held in only by a certain unconscious caution
and half-hypnotic fascination. And to make matters worse, there now flashed forth from the lofty
cupola of the Gilman House, which loomed up to the northeast behind me, a series of analogous
though differently spaced gleams which could be nothing less than an answering signal.
Controlling my muscles, and realising afresh how plainly visible I was, I resumed
my brisker and feignedly shambling pace; though keeping my eyes on that hellish and ominous
reef as long as the opening of South Street gave me a seaward view. What the whole proceeding
meant, I could not imagine; unless it involved some strange rite connected with Devil Reef,
or unless some party had landed from a ship on that sinister rock. I now bent to the left around
the ruinous green; still gazing toward the ocean as it blazed in the spectral summer moonlight,
and watching the cryptical flashing of those nameless, unexplainable beacons.
It was then that the most horrible impression of all was borne in upon me—the
impression which destroyed my last vestige of self-control and set me running frantically southward
past the yawning black doorways and fishily staring windows of that deserted nightmare street.
For at a closer glance I saw that the moonlit waters between the reef and the shore were far
from empty. They were alive with a teeming horde of shapes swimming inward toward the town;
and even at my vast distance and in my single moment of perception I could tell that the bobbing
heads and flailing arms were alien and aberrant in a way scarcely to be expressed or consciously
formulated.
My frantic running ceased before I had covered a block, for at my left I began
to hear something like the hue and cry of organised pursuit. There were footsteps and guttural
sounds, and a rattling motor wheezed south along Federal Street. In a second all my plans were
utterly changed—for if the southward highway were blocked ahead of me, I must clearly
find another egress from Innsmouth. I paused and drew into a gaping doorway, reflecting how
lucky I was to have left the moonlit open space before these pursuers came down the parallel
street.
A second reflection was less comforting. Since the pursuit was down another
street, it was plain that the party was not following me directly. It had not seen me, but was
simply obeying a general plan of cutting off my escape. This, however, implied that all roads
leading out of Innsmouth were similarly patrolled; for the denizens could not have known what
route I intended to take. If this were so, I would have to make my retreat across country away
from any road; but how could I do that in view of the marshy and creek-riddled nature of all
the surrounding region? For a moment my brain reeled—both from sheer hopelessness and
from a rapid increase in the omnipresent fishy odour.
Then I thought of the abandoned railway to Rowley, whose solid line of ballasted,
weed-grown earth still stretched off to the northwest from the crumbling station on the edge
of the river-gorge. There was just a chance that the townsfolk would not think of that; since
its brier-choked desertion made it half-impassable, and the unlikeliest of all avenues for a
fugitive to choose. I had seen it clearly from my hotel window, and knew about how it lay. Most
of its earlier length was uncomfortably visible from the Rowley road, and from high places in
the town itself; but one could perhaps crawl inconspicuously through the undergrowth. At any
rate, it would form my only chance of deliverance, and there was nothing to do but try it.
Drawing inside the hall of my deserted shelter, I once more consulted the grocery
boy’s map with the aid of the flashlight. The immediate problem was how to reach the ancient
railway; and I now saw that the safest course was ahead to Babson Street, then west to Lafayette—there
edging around but not crossing an open space homologous to the one I had traversed—and
subsequently back northward and westward in a zigzagging line through Lafayette, Bates, Adams,
and Bank Streets—the latter skirting the river-gorge—to the abandoned and dilapidated
station I had seen from my window. My reason for going ahead to Babson was that I wished neither
to re-cross the earlier open space nor to begin my westward course along a cross street as broad
as South.
Starting once more, I crossed the street to the right-hand side in order to
edge around into Babson as inconspicuously as possible. Noises still continued in Federal Street,
and as I glanced behind me I thought I saw a gleam of light near the building through which
I had escaped. Anxious to leave Washington Street, I broke into a quiet dog-trot, trusting to
luck not to encounter any observing eye. Next the corner of Babson Street I saw to my alarm
that one of the houses was still inhabited, as attested by curtains at the window; but there
were no lights within, and I passed it without disaster.
In Babson Street, which crossed Federal and might thus reveal me to the searchers,
I clung as closely as possible to the sagging, uneven buildings; twice pausing in a doorway
as the noises behind me momentarily increased. The open space ahead shone wide and desolate
under the moon, but my route would not force me to cross it. During my second pause I began
to detect a fresh distribution of the vague sounds; and upon looking cautiously out from cover
beheld a motor-car darting across the open space, bound outward along Eliot Street, which there
intersects both Babson and Lafayette.
As I watched—choked by a sudden rise in the fishy odour after a short
abatement—I saw a band of uncouth, crouching shapes loping and shambling in the same direction;
and knew that this must be the party guarding the Ipswich road, since that highway forms an
extension of Eliot Street. Two of the figures I glimpsed were in voluminous robes, and one wore
a peaked diadem which glistened whitely in the moonlight. The gait of this figure was so odd
that it sent a chill through me—for it seemed to me the creature was almost hopping.
When the last of the band was out of sight I resumed my progress; darting around
the corner into Lafayette Street, and crossing Eliot very hurriedly lest stragglers of the party
be still advancing along that thoroughfare. I did hear some croaking and clattering sounds far
off toward Town Square, but accomplished the passage without disaster. My greatest dread was
in re-crossing broad and moonlit South Street—with its seaward view—and I had to
nerve myself for the ordeal. Someone might easily be looking, and possible Eliot Street stragglers
could not fail to glimpse me from either of two points. At the last moment I decided I had better
slacken my trot and make the crossing as before in the shambling gait of an average Innsmouth
native.
When the view of the water again opened out—this time on my right—I
was half-determined not to look at it at all. I could not, however, resist; but cast a sidelong
glance as I carefully and imitatively shambled toward the protecting shadows ahead. There was
no ship visible, as I had half expected there would be. Instead, the first thing which caught
my eye was a small rowboat pulling in toward the abandoned wharves and laden with some bulky,
tarpaulin-covered object. Its rowers, though distantly and indistinctly seen, were of an especially
repellent aspect. Several swimmers were still discernible; while on the far black reef I could
see a faint, steady glow unlike the winking beacon visible before, and of a curious colour which
I could not precisely identify. Above the slant roofs ahead and to the right there loomed the
tall cupola of the Gilman House, but it was completely dark. The fishy odour, dispelled for
a moment by some merciful breeze, now closed in again with maddening intensity.
I had not quite crossed the street when I heard a muttering band advancing
along Washington from the north. As they reached the broad open space where I had had my first
disquieting glimpse of the moonlit water I could see them plainly only a block away—and
was horrified by the bestial abnormality of their faces and the dog-like sub-humanness of their
crouching gait. One man moved in a positively simian way, with long arms frequently touching
the ground; while another figure—robed and tiaraed—seemed to progress in an almost
hopping fashion. I judged this party to be the one I had seen in the Gilman’s courtyard—the
one, therefore, most closely on my trail. As some of the figures turned to look in my direction
I was transfixed with fright, yet managed to preserve the casual, shambling gait I had assumed.
To this day I do not know whether they saw me or not. If they did, my stratagem must have deceived
them, for they passed on across the moonlit space without varying their course—meanwhile
croaking and jabbering in some hateful guttural patois I could not identify.
Once more in shadow, I resumed my former dog-trot past the leaning and decrepit
houses that stared blankly into the night. Having crossed to the western sidewalk I rounded
the nearest corner into Bates Street, where I kept close to the buildings on the southern side.
I passed two houses shewing signs of habitation, one of which had faint lights in upper rooms,
yet met with no obstacle. As I turned into Adams Street I felt measurably safer, but received
a shock when a man reeled out of a black doorway directly in front of me. He proved, however,
too hopelessly drunk to be a menace; so that I reached the dismal ruins of the Bank Street warehouses
in safety.
No one was stirring in that dead street beside the river-gorge, and the roar
of the waterfalls quite drowned my footsteps. It was a long dog-trot to the ruined station,
and the great brick warehouse walls around me seemed somehow more terrifying than the fronts
of private houses. At last I saw the ancient arcaded station—or what was left of it—and
made directly for the tracks that started from its farther end.
The rails were rusty but mainly intact, and not more than half the ties had
rotted away. Walking or running on such a surface was very difficult; but I did my best, and
on the whole made very fair time. For some distance the line kept on along the gorge’s
brink, but at length I reached the long covered bridge where it crossed the chasm at a dizzy
height. The condition of this bridge would determine my next step. If humanly possible, I would
use it; if not, I would have to risk more street wandering and take the nearest intact highway
bridge.
The vast, barn-like length of the old bridge gleamed spectrally in the moonlight,
and I saw that the ties were safe for at least a few feet within. Entering, I began to use my
flashlight, and was almost knocked down by the cloud of bats that flapped past me. About half
way across there was a perilous gap in the ties which I feared for a moment would halt me; but
in the end I risked a desperate jump which fortunately succeeded.
I was glad to see the moonlight again when I emerged from that macabre tunnel.
The old tracks crossed River Street at grade, and at once veered off into a region increasingly
rural and with less and less of Innsmouth’s abhorrent fishy odour. Here the dense growth
of weeds and briers hindered me and cruelly tore my clothes, but I was none the less glad that
they were there to give me concealment in case of peril. I knew that much of my route must be
visible from the Rowley road.
The marshy region began very shortly, with the single track on a low, grassy
embankment where the weedy growth was somewhat thinner. Then came a sort of island of higher
ground, where the line passed through a shallow open cut choked with bushes and brambles. I
was very glad of this partial shelter, since at this point the Rowley road was uncomfortably
near according to my window view. At the end of the cut it would cross the track and swerve
off to a safer distance; but meanwhile I must be exceedingly careful. I was by this time thankfully
certain that the railway itself was not patrolled.
Just before entering the cut I glanced behind me, but saw no pursuer. The ancient
spires and roofs of decaying Innsmouth gleamed lovely and ethereal in the magic yellow moonlight,
and I thought of how they must have looked in the old days before the shadow fell. Then, as
my gaze circled inland from the town, something less tranquil arrested my notice and held me
immobile for a second.
What I saw—or fancied I saw—was a disturbing suggestion of undulant
motion far to the south; a suggestion which made me conclude that a very large horde must be
pouring out of the city along the level Ipswich road. The distance was great, and I could distinguish
nothing in detail; but I did not at all like the look of that moving column. It undulated too
much, and glistened too brightly in the rays of the now westering moon. There was a suggestion
of sound, too, though the wind was blowing the other way—a suggestion of bestial scraping
and bellowing even worse than the muttering of the parties I had lately overheard.
All sorts of unpleasant conjectures crossed my mind. I thought of those very
extreme Innsmouth types said to be hidden in crumbling, centuried warrens near the waterfront.
I thought, too, of those nameless swimmers I had seen. Counting the parties so far glimpsed,
as well as those presumably covering other roads, the number of my pursuers must be strangely
large for a town as depopulated as Innsmouth.
Whence could come the dense personnel of such a column as I now beheld? Did
those ancient, unplumbed warrens teem with a twisted, uncatalogued, and unsuspected life? Or
had some unseen ship indeed landed a legion of unknown outsiders on that hellish reef? Who were
they? Why were they there? And if such a column of them was scouring the Ipswich road, would
the patrols on the other roads be likewise augmented?
I had entered the brush-grown cut and was struggling along at a very slow pace
when that damnable fishy odour again waxed dominant. Had the wind suddenly changed eastward,
so that it blew in from the sea and over the town? It must have, I concluded, since I now began
to hear shocking guttural murmurs from that hitherto silent direction. There was another sound,
too—a kind of wholesale, colossal flopping or pattering which somehow called up images
of the most detestable sort. It made me think illogically of that unpleasantly undulating column
on the far-off Ipswich road.
And then both stench and sounds grew stronger, so that I paused shivering and
grateful for the cut’s protection. It was here, I recalled, that the Rowley road drew
so close to the old railway before crossing westward and diverging. Something was coming along
that road, and I must lie low till its passage and vanishment in the distance. Thank heaven
these creatures employed no dogs for tracking—though perhaps that would have been impossible
amidst the omnipresent regional odour. Crouched in the bushes of that sandy cleft I felt reasonably
safe, even though I knew the searchers would have to cross the track in front of me not much
more than a hundred yards away. I would be able to see them, but they could not, except by a
malign miracle, see me.
All at once I began dreading to look at them as they passed. I saw the close
moonlit space where they would surge by, and had curious thoughts about the irredeemable pollution
of that space. They would perhaps be the worst of all Innsmouth types—something one would
not care to remember.
The stench waxed overpowering, and the noises swelled to a bestial babel of
croaking, baying, and barking without the least suggestion of human speech. Were these indeed
the voices of my pursuers? Did they have dogs after all? So far I had seen none of the lower
animals in Innsmouth. That flopping or pattering was monstrous—I could not look upon the
degenerate creatures responsible for it. I would keep my eyes shut till the sounds receded toward
the west. The horde was very close now—the air foul with their hoarse snarlings, and the
ground almost shaking with their alien-rhythmed footfalls. My breath nearly ceased to come,
and I put every ounce of will power into the task of holding my eyelids down.
I am not even yet willing to say whether what followed was a hideous actuality
or only a nightmare hallucination. The later action of the government, after my frantic appeals,
would tend to confirm it as a monstrous truth; but could not an hallucination have been repeated
under the quasi-hypnotic spell of that ancient, haunted, and shadowed town? Such places have
strange properties, and the legacy of insane legend might well have acted on more than one human
imagination amidst those dead, stench-cursed streets and huddles of rotting roofs and crumbling
steeples. Is it not possible that the germ of an actual contagious madness lurks in the depths
of that shadow over Innsmouth? Who can be sure of reality after hearing things like the tale
of old Zadok Allen? The government men never found poor Zadok, and have no conjectures to make
as to what became of him. Where does madness leave off and reality begin? Is it possible that
even my latest fear is sheer delusion?
But I must try to tell what I thought I saw that night under the mocking yellow
moon—saw surging and hopping down the Rowley road in plain sight in front of me as I crouched
among the wild brambles of that desolate railway cut. Of course my resolution to keep my eyes
shut had failed. It was foredoomed to failure—for who could crouch blindly while a legion
of croaking, baying entities of unknown source flopped noisomely past, scarcely more than a
hundred yards away?
I thought I was prepared for the worst, and I really ought to have been prepared
considering what I had seen before. My other pursuers had been accursedly abnormal—so
should I not have been ready to face a strengthening of the abnormal element; to look
upon forms in which there was no mixture of the normal at all? I did not open my eyes until
the raucous clamour came loudly from a point obviously straight ahead. Then I knew that a long
section of them must be plainly in sight where the sides of the cut flattened out and the road
crossed the track—and I could no longer keep myself from sampling whatever horror that
leering yellow moon might have to shew.
It was the end, for whatever remains to me of life on the surface of this earth,
of every vestige of mental peace and confidence in the integrity of Nature and of the human
mind. Nothing that I could have imagined—nothing, even, that I could have gathered had
I credited old Zadok’s crazy tale in the most literal way—would be in any way comparable
to the daemoniac, blasphemous reality that I saw—or believe I saw. I have tried to hint
what it was in order to postpone the horror of writing it down baldly. Can it be possible that
this planet has actually spawned such things; that human eyes have truly seen, as objective
flesh, what man has hitherto known only in febrile phantasy and tenuous legend?
And yet I saw them in a limitless stream—flopping, hopping, croaking,
bleating—surging inhumanly through the spectral moonlight in a grotesque, malignant saraband
of fantastic nightmare. And some of them had tall tiaras of that nameless whitish-gold metal . . .
and some were strangely robed . . . and one, who led the way, was clad in a ghoulishly
humped black coat and striped trousers, and had a man’s felt hat perched on the shapeless
thing that answered for a head. . . .
I think their predominant colour was a greyish-green, though they had white
bellies. They were mostly shiny and slippery, but the ridges of their backs were scaly. Their
forms vaguely suggested the anthropoid, while their heads were the heads of fish, with prodigious
bulging eyes that never closed. At the sides of their necks were palpitating gills, and their
long paws were webbed. They hopped irregularly, sometimes on two legs and sometimes on four.
I was somehow glad that they had no more than four limbs. Their croaking, baying voices, clearly
used for articulate speech, held all the dark shades of expression which their staring faces
lacked.
But for all of their monstrousness they were not unfamiliar to me. I knew too
well what they must be—for was not the memory of that evil tiara at Newburyport still
fresh? They were the blasphemous fish-frogs of the nameless design—living and horrible—and
as I saw them I knew also of what that humped, tiaraed priest in the black church basement had
so fearsomely reminded me. Their number was past guessing. It seemed to me that there were limitless
swarms of them—and certainly my momentary glimpse could have shewn only the least fraction.
In another instant everything was blotted out by a merciful fit of fainting; the first I had
ever had.
V.
It was a gentle daylight rain that awaked me from my stupor in the brush-grown
railway cut, and when I staggered out to the roadway ahead I saw no trace of any prints in the
fresh mud. The fishy odour, too, was gone. Innsmouth’s ruined roofs and toppling steeples
loomed up greyly toward the southeast, but not a living creature did I spy in all the desolate
salt marshes around. My watch was still going, and told me that the hour was past noon.
The reality of what I had been through was highly uncertain in my mind, but
I felt that something hideous lay in the background. I must get away from evil-shadowed Innsmouth—and
accordingly I began to test my cramped, wearied powers of locomotion. Despite weakness, hunger,
horror, and bewilderment I found myself after a long time able to walk; so started slowly along the
muddy road to Rowley. Before evening I was in the village, getting a meal and providing myself
with presentable clothes. I caught the night train to Arkham, and the next day talked long and
earnestly with government officials there; a process I later repeated in Boston. With the main
result of these colloquies the public is now familiar—and I wish, for normality’s
sake, there were nothing more to tell. Perhaps it is madness that is overtaking me—yet
perhaps a greater horror—or a greater marvel—is reaching out.
As may well be imagined, I gave up most of the foreplanned features of the
rest of my tour—the scenic, architectural, and antiquarian diversions on which I had counted
so heavily. Nor did I dare look for that piece of strange jewellery said to be in the Miskatonic
University Museum. I did, however, improve my stay in Arkham by collecting some genealogical
notes I had long wished to possess; very rough and hasty data, it is true, but capable of good
use later on when I might have time to collate and codify them. The curator of the historical
society there—Mr. E. Lapham Peabody—was very courteous about assisting me, and expressed
unusual interest when I told him I was a grandson of Eliza Orne of Arkham, who was born in 1867
and had married James Williamson of Ohio at the age of seventeen.
It seemed that a maternal uncle of mine had been there many years before on
a quest much like my own; and that my grandmother’s family was a topic of some local curiosity.
There had, Mr. Peabody said, been considerable discussion about the marriage of her father,
Benjamin Orne, just after the Civil War; since the ancestry of the bride was peculiarly puzzling.
That bride was understood to have been an orphaned Marsh of New Hampshire—a cousin of
the Essex County Marshes—but her education had been in France and she knew very little
of her family. A guardian had deposited funds in a Boston bank to maintain her and her French
governess; but that guardian’s name was unfamiliar to Arkham people, and in time he dropped
out of sight, so that the governess assumed his role by court appointment. The Frenchwoman—now
long dead—was very taciturn, and there were those who said she could have told more than
she did.
But the most baffling thing was the inability of anyone to place the recorded
parents of the young woman—Enoch and Lydia (Meserve) Marsh—among the known families
of New Hampshire. Possibly, many suggested, she was the natural daughter of some Marsh of prominence—she
certainly had the true Marsh eyes. Most of the puzzling was done after her early death, which
took place at the birth of my grandmother—her only child. Having formed some disagreeable
impressions connected with the name of Marsh, I did not welcome the news that it belonged on
my own ancestral tree; nor was I pleased by Mr. Peabody’s suggestion that I had the true
Marsh eyes myself. However, I was grateful for data which I knew would prove valuable; and took
copious notes and lists of book references regarding the well-documented Orne family.
I went directly home to Toledo from Boston, and later spent a month at Maumee
recuperating from my ordeal. In September I entered Oberlin for my final year, and from then
till the next June was busy with studies and other wholesome activities—reminded of the
bygone terror only by occasional official visits from government men in connexion with the campaign
which my pleas and evidence had started. Around the middle of July—just a year after the
Innsmouth experience—I spent a week with my late mother’s family in Cleveland; checking
some of my new genealogical data with the various notes, traditions, and bits of heirloom material
in existence there, and seeing what kind of connected chart I could construct.
I did not exactly relish the task, for the atmosphere of the Williamson home
had always depressed me. There was a strain of morbidity there, and my mother had never encouraged
my visiting her parents as a child, although she always welcomed her father when he came to
Toledo. My Arkham-born grandmother had seemed strange and almost terrifying to me, and I do
not think I grieved when she disappeared. I was eight years old then, and it was said that she
had wandered off in grief after the suicide of my uncle Douglas, her eldest son. He had shot
himself after a trip to New England—the same trip, no doubt, which had caused him to be
recalled at the Arkham Historical Society.
This uncle had resembled her, and I had never liked him either. Something about
the staring, unwinking expression of both of them had given me a vague, unaccountable uneasiness.
My mother and uncle Walter had not looked like that. They were like their father, though poor
little cousin Lawrence—Walter’s son—had been an almost perfect duplicate of
his grandmother before his condition took him to the permanent seclusion of a sanitarium at
Canton. I had not seen him in four years, but my uncle once implied that his state, both mental
and physical, was very bad. This worry had probably been a major cause of his mother’s
death two years before.
My grandfather and his widowed son Walter now comprised the Cleveland household,
but the memory of older times hung thickly over it. I still disliked the place, and tried to
get my researches done as quickly as possible. Williamson records and traditions were supplied
in abundance by my grandfather; though for Orne material I had to depend on my uncle Walter,
who put at my disposal the contents of all his files, including notes, letters, cuttings, heirlooms,
photographs, and miniatures.
It was in going over the letters and pictures on the Orne side that I began
to acquire a kind of terror of my own ancestry. As I have said, my grandmother and uncle Douglas
had always disturbed me. Now, years after their passing, I gazed at their pictured faces with
a measurably heightened feeling of repulsion and alienation. I could not at first understand
the change, but gradually a horrible sort of comparison began to obtrude itself on my
unconscious mind despite the steady refusal of my consciousness to admit even the least suspicion
of it. It was clear that the typical expression of these faces now suggested something it had
not suggested before—something which would bring stark panic if too openly thought of.
But the worst shock came when my uncle shewed me the Orne jewellery in a downtown
safe-deposit vault. Some of the items were delicate and inspiring enough, but there was one
box of strange old pieces descended from my mysterious great-grandmother which my uncle was
almost reluctant to produce. They were, he said, of very grotesque and almost repulsive design,
and had never to his knowledge been publicly worn; though my grandmother used to enjoy looking
at them. Vague legends of bad luck clustered around them, and my great-grandmother’s French
governess had said they ought not to be worn in New England, though it would be quite safe to
wear them in Europe.
As my uncle began slowly and grudgingly to unwrap the things he urged me not
to be shocked by the strangeness and frequent hideousness of the designs. Artists and archaeologists
who had seen them pronounced the workmanship superlatively and exotically exquisite, though
no one seemed able to define their exact material or assign them to any specific art tradition.
There were two armlets, a tiara, and a kind of pectoral; the latter having in high relief certain
figures of almost unbearable extravagance.
During this description I had kept a tight rein on my emotions, but my face
must have betrayed my mounting fears. My uncle looked concerned, and paused in his unwrapping
to study my countenance. I motioned to him to continue, which he did with renewed signs of reluctance.
He seemed to expect some demonstration when the first piece—the tiara—became visible,
but I doubt if he expected quite what actually happened. I did not expect it, either, for I
thought I was thoroughly forewarned regarding what the jewellery would turn out to be. What
I did was to faint silently away, just as I had done in that brier-choked railway cut a year
before.
From that day on my life has been a nightmare of brooding and apprehension,
nor do I know how much is hideous truth and how much madness. My great-grandmother had been
a Marsh of unknown source whose husband lived in Arkham—and did not old Zadok say that
the daughter of Obed Marsh by a monstrous mother was married to an Arkham man through a trick?
What was it the ancient toper had muttered about the likeness of my eyes to Captain Obed’s?
In Arkham, too, the curator had told me I had the true Marsh eyes. Was Obed Marsh my own great-great-grandfather?
Who—or what—then, was my great-great-grandmother? But perhaps this was all
madness. Those whitish-gold ornaments might easily have been bought from some Innsmouth sailor
by the father of my great-grandmother, whoever he was. And that look in the staring-eyed faces
of my grandmother and self-slain uncle might be sheer fancy on my part—sheer fancy, bolstered
up by the Innsmouth shadow which had so darkly coloured my imagination. But why had my uncle
killed himself after an ancestral quest in New England?
For more than two years I fought off these reflections with partial success.
My father secured me a place in an insurance office, and I buried myself in routine as deeply
as possible. In the winter of 1930–31, however, the dreams began. They were very sparse
and insidious at first, but increased in frequency and vividness as the weeks went by. Great
watery spaces opened out before me, and I seemed to wander through titanic sunken porticos and
labyrinths of weedy Cyclopean walls with grotesque fishes as my companions. Then the other
shapes began to appear, filling me with nameless horror the moment I awoke. But during the
dreams they did not horrify me at all—I was one with them; wearing their unhuman trappings,
treading their aqueous ways, and praying monstrously at their evil sea-bottom temples.
There was much more than I could remember, but even what I did remember each
morning would be enough to stamp me as a madman or a genius if ever I dared write it down. Some
frightful influence, I felt, was seeking gradually to drag me out of the sane world of wholesome
life into unnamable abysses of blackness and alienage; and the process told heavily on me. My
health and appearance grew steadily worse, till finally I was forced to give up my position
and adopt the static, secluded life of an invalid. Some odd nervous affliction had me in its
grip, and I found myself at times almost unable to shut my eyes.
It was then that I began to study the mirror with mounting alarm. The slow
ravages of disease are not pleasant to watch, but in my case there was something subtler and
more puzzling in the background. My father seemed to notice it, too, for he began looking at
me curiously and almost affrightedly. What was taking place in me? Could it be that I was coming
to resemble my grandmother and uncle Douglas?
One night I had a frightful dream in which I met my grandmother under the sea.
She lived in a phosphorescent palace of many terraces, with gardens of strange leprous corals
and grotesque brachiate efflorescences, and welcomed me with a warmth that may have been sardonic.
She had changed—as those who take to the water change—and told me she had never
died. Instead, she had gone to a spot her dead son had learned about, and had leaped to a realm
whose wonders—destined for him as well—he had spurned with a smoking pistol. This
was to be my realm, too—I could not escape it. I would never die, but would live with
those who had lived since before man ever walked the earth.
I met also that which had been her grandmother. For eighty thousand years Pth’thya-l’yi
had lived in Y’ha-nthlei, and thither she had gone back after Obed Marsh was dead. Y’ha-nthlei
was not destroyed when the upper-earth men shot death into the sea. It was hurt, but not destroyed.
The Deep Ones could never be destroyed, even though the palaeogean magic of the forgotten Old
Ones might sometimes check them. For the present they would rest; but some day, if they remembered,
they would rise again for the tribute Great Cthulhu craved. It would be a city greater than
Innsmouth next time. They had planned to spread, and had brought up that which would help them,
but now they must wait once more. For bringing the upper-earth men’s death I must do a
penance, but that would not be heavy. This was the dream in which I saw a shoggoth for
the first time, and the sight set me awake in a frenzy of screaming. That morning the mirror
definitely told me I had acquired the Innsmouth look.
So far I have not shot myself as my uncle Douglas did. I bought an automatic
and almost took the step, but certain dreams deterred me. The tense extremes of horror are lessening,
and I feel queerly drawn toward the unknown sea-deeps instead of fearing them. I hear and do
strange things in sleep, and awake with a kind of exaltation instead of terror. I do not believe
I need to wait for the full change as most have waited. If I did, my father would probably shut
me up in a sanitarium as my poor little cousin is shut up. Stupendous and unheard-of splendours
await me below, and I shall seek them soon. Iä-R’lyeh! Cthulhu fhtagn! Iä!
Iä! No, I shall not shoot myself—I cannot be made to shoot myself!
I shall plan my cousin’s escape from that Canton madhouse, and together
we shall go to marvel-shadowed Innsmouth. We shall swim out to that brooding reef in the sea
and dive down through black abysses to Cyclopean and many-columned Y’ha-nthlei, and in
that lair of the Deep Ones we shall dwell amidst wonder and glory for ever.


The Silver Key


When Randolph Carter was thirty he lost the key of the gate of dreams. Prior to that time he
had made up for the prosiness of life by nightly excursions to strange and ancient cities beyond
space, and lovely, unbelievable garden lands across ethereal seas; but as middle age hardened
upon him he felt these liberties slipping away little by little, until at last he was cut off
altogether. No more could his galleys sail up the river Oukranos past the gilded spires of Thran,
or his elephant caravans tramp through perfumed jungles in Kled, where forgotten palaces with
veined ivory columns sleep lovely and unbroken under the moon.
He had read much of things as they are, and talked with too many people. Well-meaning
philosophers had taught him to look into the logical relations of things, and analyse the processes
which shaped his thoughts and fancies. Wonder had gone away, and he had forgotten that all life
is only a set of pictures in the brain, among which there is no difference betwixt those born
of real things and those born of inward dreamings, and no cause to value the one above the other.
Custom had dinned into his ears a superstitious reverence for that which tangibly and physically
exists, and had made him secretly ashamed to dwell in visions. Wise men told him his simple
fancies were inane and childish, and he believed it because he could see that they might easily
be so. What he failed to recall was that the deeds of reality are just as inane and childish,
and even more absurd because their actors persist in fancying them full of meaning and purpose
as the blind cosmos grinds aimlessly on from nothing to something and from something back to
nothing again, neither heeding nor knowing the wishes or existence of the minds that flicker
for a second now and then in the darkness.
They had chained him down to things that are, and had then explained the workings
of those things till mystery had gone out of the world. When he complained, and longed to escape
into twilight realms where magic moulded all the little vivid fragments and prized associations
of his mind into vistas of breathless expectancy and unquenchable delight, they turned him instead
toward the new-found prodigies of science, bidding him find wonder in the atom’s vortex
and mystery in the sky’s dimensions. And when he had failed to find these boons in things
whose laws are known and measurable, they told him he lacked imagination, and was immature because
he preferred dream-illusions to the illusions of our physical creation.
So Carter had tried to do as others did, and pretended that the common events
and emotions of earthy minds were more important than the fantasies of rare and delicate souls.
He did not dissent when they told him that the animal pain of a stuck pig or dyspeptic ploughman
in real life is a greater thing than the peerless beauty of Narath with its hundred carven gates
and domes of chalcedony, which he dimly remembered from his dreams; and under their guidance
he cultivated a painstaking sense of pity and tragedy.
Once in a while, though, he could not help seeing how shallow, fickle, and
meaningless all human aspirations are, and how emptily our real impulses contrast with those
pompous ideals we profess to hold. Then he would have recourse to the polite laughter they had
taught him to use against the extravagance and artificiality of dreams; for he saw that the
daily life of our world is every inch as extravagant and artificial, and far less worthy of
respect because of its poverty in beauty and its silly reluctance to admit its own lack of reason
and purpose. In this way he became a kind of humorist, for he did not see that even humour is
empty in a mindless universe devoid of any true standard of consistency or inconsistency.
In the first days of his bondage he had turned to the gentle churchly faith
endeared to him by the naive trust of his fathers, for thence stretched mystic avenues which
seemed to promise escape from life. Only on closer view did he mark the starved fancy and beauty,
the stale and prosy triteness, and the owlish gravity and grotesque claims of solid truth which
reigned boresomely and overwhelmingly among most of its professors; or feel to the full the
awkwardness with which it sought to keep alive as literal fact the outgrown fears and guesses
of a primal race confronting the unknown. It wearied Carter to see how solemnly people tried
to make earthly reality out of old myths which every step of their boasted science confuted,
and this misplaced seriousness killed the attachment he might have kept for the ancient creeds
had they been content to offer the sonorous rites and emotional outlets in their true guise
of ethereal fantasy.
But when he came to study those who had thrown off the old myths, he found
them even more ugly than those who had not. They did not know that beauty lies in harmony, and
that loveliness of life has no standard amidst an aimless cosmos save only its harmony with
the dreams and the feelings which have gone before and blindly moulded our little spheres out
of the rest of chaos. They did not see that good and evil and beauty and ugliness are only ornamental
fruits of perspective, whose sole value lies in their linkage to what chance made our fathers
think and feel, and whose finer details are different for every race and culture. Instead, they
either denied these things altogether or transferred them to the crude, vague instincts which
they shared with the beasts and peasants; so that their lives were dragged malodorously out
in pain, ugliness, and disproportion, yet filled with a ludicrous pride at having escaped from
something no more unsound than that which still held them. They had traded the false gods of
fear and blind piety for those of licence and anarchy.
Carter did not taste deeply of these modern freedoms; for their cheapness and
squalor sickened a spirit loving beauty alone, while his reason rebelled at the flimsy logic
with which their champions tried to gild brute impulse with a sacredness stripped from the idols
they had discarded. He saw that most of them, in common with their cast-off priestcraft, could
not escape from the delusion that life has a meaning apart from that which men dream into it;
and could not lay aside the crude notion of ethics and obligations beyond those of beauty, even
when all Nature shrieked of its unconsciousness and impersonal unmorality in the light of their
scientific discoveries. Warped and bigoted with preconceived illusions of justice, freedom,
and consistency, they cast off the old lore and the old ways with the old beliefs; nor ever
stopped to think that that lore and those ways were the sole makers of their present thoughts
and judgments, and the sole guides and standards in a meaningless universe without fixed aims
or stable points of reference. Having lost these artificial settings, their lives grew void
of direction and dramatic interest; till at length they strove to drown their ennui in bustle
and pretended usefulness, noise and excitement, barbaric display and animal sensation. When
these things palled, disappointed, or grew nauseous through revulsion, they cultivated irony
and bitterness, and found fault with the social order. Never could they realise that their brute
foundations were as shifting and contradictory as the gods of their elders, and that the satisfaction
of one moment is the bane of the next. Calm, lasting beauty comes only in dream, and this solace
the world had thrown away when in its worship of the real it threw away the secrets of childhood
and innocence.
Amidst this chaos of hollowness and unrest Carter tried to live as befitted
a man of keen thought and good heritage. With his dreams fading under the ridicule of the age
he could not believe in anything, but the love of harmony kept him close to the ways of his
race and station. He walked impassive through the cities of men, and sighed because no vista
seemed fully real; because every flash of yellow sunlight on tall roofs and every glimpse of
balustraded plazas in the first lamps of evening served only to remind him of dreams he had
once known, and to make him homesick for ethereal lands he no longer knew how to find. Travel
was only a mockery; and even the Great War stirred him but little, though he served from the
first in the Foreign Legion of France. For a while he sought friends, but soon grew weary of
the crudeness of their emotions, and the sameness and earthiness of their visions. He felt vaguely
glad that all his relatives were distant and out of touch with him, for they could not have
understood his mental life. That is, none but his grandfather and great-uncle Christopher could,
and they were long dead.
Then he began once more the writing of books, which he had left off when dreams
first failed him. But here, too, was there no satisfaction or fulfilment; for the touch of earth
was upon his mind, and he could not think of lovely things as he had done of yore. Ironic humour
dragged down all the twilight minarets he reared, and the earthy fear of improbability blasted
all the delicate and amazing flowers in his faery gardens. The convention of assumed pity spilt
mawkishness on his characters, while the myth of an important reality and significant human
events and emotions debased all his high fantasy into thin-veiled allegory and cheap social
satire. His new novels were successful as his old ones had never been; and because he knew how
empty they must be to please an empty herd, he burned them and ceased his writing. They were
very graceful novels, in which he urbanely laughed at the dreams he lightly sketched; but he
saw that their sophistication had sapped all their life away.
It was after this that he cultivated deliberate illusion, and dabbled in the
notions of the bizarre and the eccentric as an antidote for the commonplace. Most of these,
however, soon shewed their poverty and barrenness; and he saw that the popular doctrines of
occultism are as dry and inflexible as those of science, yet without even the slender palliative
of truth to redeem them. Gross stupidity, falsehood, and muddled thinking are not dream; and
form no escape from life to a mind trained above their level. So Carter bought stranger books
and sought out deeper and more terrible men of fantastic erudition; delving into arcana of consciousness
that few have trod, and learning things about the secret pits of life, legend, and immemorial
antiquity which disturbed him ever afterward. He decided to live on a rarer plane, and furnished
his Boston home to suit his changing moods; one room for each, hung in appropriate colours,
furnished with befitting books and objects, and provided with sources of the proper sensations
of light, heat, sound, taste, and odour.
Once he heard of a man in the South who was shunned and feared for the blasphemous
things he read in prehistoric books and clay tablets smuggled from India and Arabia. Him he
visited, living with him and sharing his studies for seven years, till horror overtook them
one midnight in an unknown and archaic graveyard, and only one emerged where two had entered.
Then he went back to Arkham, the terrible witch-haunted old town of his forefathers in New England,
and had experiences in the dark, amidst the hoary willows and tottering gambrel roofs, which
made him seal forever certain pages in the diary of a wild-minded ancestor. But these horrors
took him only to the edge of reality, and were not of the true dream country he had known in
youth; so that at fifty he despaired of any rest or contentment in a world grown too busy for
beauty and too shrewd for dream.
Having perceived at last the hollowness and futility of real things, Carter
spent his days in retirement, and in wistful disjointed memories of his dream-filled youth.
He thought it rather silly that he bothered to keep on living at all, and got from a South American
acquaintance a very curious liquid to take him to oblivion without suffering. Inertia and force
of habit, however, caused him to defer action; and he lingered indecisively among thoughts of
old times, taking down the strange hangings from his walls and refitting the house as it was
in his early boyhood—purple panes, Victorian furniture, and all.
With the passage of time he became almost glad he had lingered, for his relics
of youth and his cleavage from the world made life and sophistication seem very distant and
unreal; so much so that a touch of magic and expectancy stole back into his nightly slumbers.
For years those slumbers had known only such twisted reflections of every-day things as the
commonest slumbers know, but now there returned a flicker of something stranger and wilder;
something of vaguely awesome immanence which took the form of tensely clear pictures from his
childhood days, and made him think of little inconsequential things he had long forgotten. He
would often awake calling for his mother and grandfather, both in their graves a quarter of
a century.
Then one night his grandfather reminded him of a key. The grey old scholar,
as vivid as in life, spoke long and earnestly of their ancient line, and of the strange visions
of the delicate and sensitive men who composed it. He spoke of the flame-eyed Crusader who learnt
wild secrets of the Saracens that held him captive; and of the first Sir Randolph Carter who
studied magic when Elizabeth was queen. He spoke, too, of that Edmund Carter who had just escaped
hanging in the Salem witchcraft, and who had placed in an antique box a great silver key handed
down from his ancestors. Before Carter awaked, the gentle visitant had told him where to find
that box; that carved oak box of archaic wonder whose grotesque lid no hand had raised for two
centuries.
In the dust and shadows of the great attic he found it, remote and forgotten
at the back of a drawer in a tall chest. It was about a foot square, and its Gothic carvings
were so fearful that he did not marvel no person since Edmund Carter had dared to open it. It
gave forth no noise when shaken, but was mystic with the scent of unremembered spices. That
it held a key was indeed only a dim legend, and Randolph Carter’s father had never known
such a box existed. It was bound in rusty iron, and no means was provided for working the formidable
lock. Carter vaguely understood that he would find within it some key to the lost gate of dreams,
but of where and how to use it his grandfather had told him nothing.
An old servant forced the carven lid, shaking as he did so at the hideous faces
leering from the blackened wood, and at some unplaced familiarity. Inside, wrapped in a discoloured
parchment, was a huge key of tarnished silver covered with cryptical arabesques; but of any
legible explanation there was none. The parchment was voluminous, and held only the strange
hieroglyphs of an unknown tongue written with an antique reed. Carter recognised the characters
as those he had seen on a certain papyrus scroll belonging to that terrible scholar of the South
who had vanished one midnight in a nameless cemetery. The man had always shivered when he read
this scroll, and Carter shivered now.
But he cleaned the key, and kept it by him nightly in its aromatic box of ancient
oak. His dreams were meanwhile increasing in vividness, and though shewing him none of the strange
cities and incredible gardens of the old days, were assuming a definite cast whose purpose could
not be mistaken. They were calling him back along the years, and with the mingled wills of all
his fathers were pulling him toward some hidden and ancestral source. Then he knew he must go
into the past and merge himself with old things, and day after day he thought of the hills to
the north where haunted Arkham and the rushing Miskatonic and the lonely rustic homestead of
his people lay.
In the brooding fire of autumn Carter took the old remembered way past graceful
lines of rolling hill and stone-walled meadow, distant vale and hanging woodland, curving road
and nestling farmstead, and the crystal windings of the Miskatonic, crossed here and there by
rustic bridges of wood or stone. At one bend he saw the group of giant elms among which an ancestor
had oddly vanished a century and a half before, and shuddered as the wind blew meaningly through
them. Then there was the crumbling farmhouse of old Goody Fowler the witch, with its little
evil windows and great roof sloping nearly to the ground on the north side. He speeded up his
car as he passed it, and did not slacken till he had mounted the hill where his mother and her
fathers before her were born, and where the old white house still looked proudly across the
road at the breathlessly lovely panorama of rocky slope and verdant valley, with the distant
spires of Kingsport on the horizon, and hints of the archaic, dream-laden sea in the farthest
background.
Then came the steeper slope that held the old Carter place he had not seen
in over forty years. Afternoon was far gone when he reached the foot, and at the bend half way
up he paused to scan the outspread countryside golden and glorified in the slanting floods of
magic poured out by a western sun. All the strangeness and expectancy of his recent dreams seemed
present in this hushed and unearthly landscape, and he thought of the unknown solitudes of other
planets as his eyes traced out the velvet and deserted lawns shining undulant between their
tumbled walls, the clumps of faery forest setting off far lines of purple hills beyond hills,
and the spectral wooded valley dipping down in shadow to dank hollows where trickling waters
crooned and gurgled among swollen and distorted roots.
Something made him feel that motors did not belong in the realm he was seeking,
so he left his car at the edge of the forest, and putting the great key in his coat pocket walked
on up the hill. Woods now engulfed him utterly, though he knew the house was on a high knoll
that cleared the trees except to the north. He wondered how it would look, for it had been left
vacant and untended through his neglect since the death of his strange great-uncle Christopher
thirty years before. In his boyhood he had revelled through long visits there, and had found
weird marvels in the woods beyond the orchard.
Shadows thickened around him, for the night was near. Once a gap in the trees
opened up to the right, so that he saw off across leagues of twilight meadow and spied the old
Congregational steeple on Central Hill in Kingsport; pink with the last flush of day, the panes
of the little round windows blazing with reflected fire. Then, when he was in deep shadow again,
he recalled with a start that the glimpse must have come from childish memory alone, since the
old white church had long been torn down to make room for the Congregational Hospital. He had
read of it with interest, for the paper had told about some strange burrows or passages found
in the rocky hill beneath.
Through his puzzlement a voice piped, and he started again at its familiarity
after long years. Old Benijah Corey had been his Uncle Christopher’s hired man, and was
aged even in those far-off times of his boyhood visits. Now he must be well over a hundred,
but that piping voice could come from no one else. He could distinguish no words, yet the tone
was haunting and unmistakable. To think that “Old Benijy” should still be alive!
“Mister Randy! Mister Randy! Whar be ye? D’ye want to skeer yer
Aunt Marthy plumb to death? Hain’t she tuld ye to keep nigh the place in the arternoon
an’ git back afur dark? Randy! Ran . . . dee! . . . He’s
the beatin’est boy fer runnin’ off in the woods I ever see; haff the time a-settin’
moonin’ raound that snake-den in the upper timber-lot! . . . Hey, yew, Ran . . .
dee!”
Randolph Carter stopped in the pitch darkness and rubbed his hand across his
eyes. Something was queer. He had been somewhere he ought not to be; had strayed very far away
to places where he had not belonged, and was now inexcusably late. He had not noticed the time
on the Kingsport steeple, though he could easily have made it out with his pocket telescope;
but he knew his lateness was something very strange and unprecedented. He was not sure he had
his little telescope with him, and put his hand in his blouse pocket to see. No, it was not
there, but there was the big silver key he had found in a box somewhere. Uncle Chris had told
him something odd once about an old unopened box with a key in it, but Aunt Martha had stopped
the story abruptly, saying it was no kind of thing to tell a child whose head was already too
full of queer fancies. He tried to recall just where he had found the key, but something seemed
very confused. He guessed it was in the attic at home in Boston, and dimly remembered bribing
Parks with half his week’s allowance to help him open the box and keep quiet about it;
but when he remembered this, the face of Parks came up very strangely, as if the wrinkles of
long years had fallen upon the brisk little Cockney.
“Ran . . . dee! Ran . . . dee! Hi! Hi!
Randy!”
A swaying lantern came around the black bend, and old Benijah pounced on the
silent and bewildered form of the pilgrim.
“Durn ye, boy, so thar ye be! Ain’t ye got a tongue in yer head,
that ye can’t answer a body? I ben callin’ this haff hour, an’ ye must a heerd
me long ago! Dun’t ye know yer Aunt Marthy’s all a-fidget over yer bein’
off arter dark? Wait till I tell yer Uncle Chris when he gits hum! Ye’d orta know these
here woods ain’t no fitten place to be traipsin’ this hour! They’s things
abroad what dun’t do nobody no good, as my gran’sir’ knowed afur me. Come,
Mister Randy, or Hannah wun’t keep supper no longer!”
So Randolph Carter was marched up the road where wondering stars glimmered
through high autumn boughs. And dogs barked as the yellow light of small-paned windows shone
out at the farther turn, and the Pleiades twinkled across the open knoll where a great gambrel
roof stood black against the dim west. Aunt Martha was in the doorway, and did not scold too
hard when Benijah shoved the truant in. She knew Uncle Chris well enough to expect such things
of the Carter blood. Randolph did not shew his key, but ate his supper in silence and protested
only when bedtime came. He sometimes dreamed better when awake, and he wanted to use that key.
In the morning Randolph was up early, and would have run off to the upper timber-lot
if Uncle Chris had not caught him and forced him into his chair by the breakfast table. He looked
impatiently around the low-pitched room with the rag carpet and exposed beams and corner-posts,
and smiled only when the orchard boughs scratched at the leaded panes of the rear window. The
trees and the hills were close to him, and formed the gates of that timeless realm which was
his true country.
Then, when he was free, he felt in his blouse pocket for the key; and being
reassured, skipped off across the orchard to the rise beyond, where the wooded hill climbed
again to heights above even the treeless knoll. The floor of the forest was mossy and mysterious,
and great lichened rocks rose vaguely here and there in the dim light like Druid monoliths among
the swollen and twisted trunks of a sacred grove. Once in his ascent Randolph crossed a rushing
stream whose falls a little way off sang runic incantations to the lurking fauns and aegipans
and dryads.
Then he came to the strange cave in the forest slope, the dreaded “snake-den”
which country folk shunned, and away from which Benijah had warned him again and again. It was
deep; far deeper than anyone but Randolph suspected, for the boy had found a fissure in the
farthermost black corner that led to a loftier grotto beyond—a haunting sepulchral place
whose granite walls held a curious illusion of conscious artifice. On this occasion he crawled
in as usual, lighting his way with matches filched from the sitting-room match-safe, and edging
through the final crevice with an eagerness hard to explain even to himself. He could not tell
why he approached the farther wall so confidently, or why he instinctively drew forth the great
silver key as he did so. But on he went, and when he danced back to the house that night he
offered no excuses for his lateness, nor heeded in the least the reproofs he gained for ignoring
the noontide dinner-horn altogether.


Now it is agreed by all the distant relatives of Randolph Carter that something occurred to
heighten his imagination in his tenth year. His cousin, Ernest B. Aspinwall, Esq., of Chicago,
is fully ten years his senior; and distinctly recalls a change in the boy after the autumn of
1883. Randolph had looked on scenes of fantasy that few others can ever have beheld, and stranger
still were some of the qualities which he shewed in relation to very mundane things. He seemed,
in fine, to have picked up an odd gift of prophecy; and reacted unusually to things which, though
at the time without meaning, were later found to justify the singular impressions. In subsequent
decades as new inventions, new names, and new events appeared one by one in the book of history,
people would now and then recall wonderingly how Carter had years before let fall some careless
word of undoubted connexion with what was then far in the future. He did not himself understand
these words, or know why certain things made him feel certain emotions; but fancied that some
unremembered dream must be responsible. It was as early as 1897 that he turned pale when some
traveller mentioned the French town of Belloy-en-Santerre, and friends remembered it when he
was almost mortally wounded there in 1916, while serving with the Foreign Legion in the Great
War.
Carter’s relatives talk much of these things because he has lately disappeared.
His little old servant Parks, who for years bore patiently with his vagaries, last saw him on
the morning he drove off alone in his car with a key he had recently found. Parks had helped
him get the key from the old box containing it, and had felt strangely affected by the grotesque
carvings on the box, and by some other odd quality he could not name. When Carter left, he had
said he was going to visit his old ancestral country around Arkham.
Half way up Elm Mountain, on the way to the ruins of the old Carter place,
they found his motor set carefully by the roadside; and in it was a box of fragrant wood with
carvings that frightened the countrymen who stumbled on it. The box held only a queer parchment
whose characters no linguist or palaeographer has been able to decipher or identify. Rain had
long effaced any possible footprints, though Boston investigators had something to say about
evidences of disturbances among the fallen timbers of the Carter place. It was, they averred,
as though someone had groped about the ruins at no distant period. A common white handkerchief
found among forest rocks on the hillside beyond cannot be identified as belonging to the missing
man.
There is talk of apportioning Randolph Carter’s estate among his heirs,
but I shall stand firmly against this course because I do not believe he is dead. There are
twists of time and space, of vision and reality, which only a dreamer can divine; and from what
I know of Carter I think he has merely found a way to traverse these mazes. Whether or not he
will ever come back, I cannot say. He wanted the lands of dream he had lost, and yearned for
the days of his childhood. Then he found a key, and I somehow believe he was able to use it
to strange advantage.
I shall ask him when I see him, for I expect to meet him shortly in a certain
dream-city we both used to haunt. It is rumoured in Ulthar, beyond the river Skai, that a new
king reigns on the opal throne in Ilek-Vad, that fabulous town of turrets atop the hollow cliffs
of glass overlooking the twilight sea wherein the bearded and finny Gnorri build their singular
labyrinths, and I believe I know how to interpret this rumour. Certainly, I look forward impatiently
to the sight of that great silver key, for in its cryptical arabesques there may stand symbolised
all the aims and mysteries of a blindly impersonal cosmos.


The Slaying of the Monster


Great was the clamour in Laen; for smoke had been spied in the Hills of the Dragon. That surely
meant the Stirrings of the Monster—the Monster who spat lava and shook the earth as he
writhed in its depths. And when the men of Laen spoke together they swore to slay the Monster and
keep his fiery breath from searing their minaret-studded city and toppling their alabaster
domes.
So it was that by torch-light gathered fully a hundred of the little people,
prepared to battle the Evil One in his hidden fast-hold. With the coming of night they began
marching in ragged columns into the foot-hills beneath the fulgent lunar rays. Ahead a burning
cloud shone clearly through the purple dusk, a guide to their goal.
For the sake of truth it is to be recorded that their spirits sank low long ere
they sighted the foe, and as the moon grew dim and the coming of the dawn was heralded by gaudy
clouds they wished themselves more than ever at home, dragon or no dragon. But as the sun rose they
cheered up slightly, and shifting their spears, resolutely trudged the remaining distance.
Clouds of sulphurous smoke hung pall-like over the world, darkening even the
new-risen sun, and always replenished by sullen puffs from the mouth of the Monster. Little tongues
of hungry flame made the Laenians move swiftly over the hot stones. “But where is the
dragon??” whispered one—fearfully and hoping it would not accept the query as an
invitation. In vain they looked—there was nothing solid enough to slay.
So shouldering their weapons, they wearily returned home and there set up a stone
tablet graven to this effect—“BEING TROUBLED BY A FIERCE MONSTER THE BRAVE CITIZENS OF
LAEN DID SET UPON IT AND SLAY IT IN ITS FEARFUL LAIR SAVING THE LAND FROM A DREADFUL
DOOM.”
These words were hard to read when we dug that stone from its deep, ancient layers
of encrusting lava.


The Thing on the Doorstep

I.

It is true that I have sent six bullets through the head of my best friend, and yet I hope to
shew by this statement that I am not his murderer. At first I shall be called a madman—madder
than the man I shot in his cell at the Arkham Sanitarium. Later some of my readers will weigh
each statement, correlate it with the known facts, and ask themselves how I could have believed
otherwise than as I did after facing the evidence of that horror—that thing on the doorstep.
Until then I also saw nothing but madness in the wild tales I have acted on.
Even now I ask myself whether I was misled—or whether I am not mad after all. I do not
know—but others have strange things to tell of Edward and Asenath Derby, and even the
stolid police are at their wits’ ends to account for that last terrible visit. They have
tried weakly to concoct a theory of a ghastly jest or warning by discharged servants, yet they
know in their hearts that the truth is something infinitely more terrible and incredible.
So I say that I have not murdered Edward Derby. Rather have I avenged him,
and in so doing purged the earth of a horror whose survival might have loosed untold terrors
on all mankind. There are black zones of shadow close to our daily paths, and now and then some
evil soul breaks a passage through. When that happens, the man who knows must strike before
reckoning the consequences.
I have known Edward Pickman Derby all his life. Eight years my junior, he was
so precocious that we had much in common from the time he was eight and I sixteen. He was the
most phenomenal child scholar I have ever known, and at seven was writing verse of a sombre,
fantastic, almost morbid cast which astonished the tutors surrounding him. Perhaps his private
education and coddled seclusion had something to do with his premature flowering. An only child,
he had organic weaknesses which startled his doting parents and caused them to keep him closely
chained to their side. He was never allowed out without his nurse, and seldom had a chance to
play unconstrainedly with other children. All this doubtless fostered a strange, secretive inner
life in the boy, with imagination as his one avenue of freedom. 
At any rate, his juvenile learning was prodigious and bizarre; and his facile
writings such as to captivate me despite my greater age. About that time I had leanings toward
art of a somewhat grotesque cast, and I found in this younger child a rare kindred spirit. What
lay behind our joint love of shadows and marvels was, no doubt, the ancient, mouldering, and
subtly fearsome town in which we lived—witch-cursed, legend-haunted Arkham, whose huddled,
sagging gambrel roofs and crumbling Georgian balustrades brood out the centuries beside the
darkly muttering Miskatonic.
As time went by I turned to architecture and gave up my design of illustrating
a book of Edward’s daemoniac poems, yet our comradeship suffered no lessening. Young Derby’s
odd genius developed remarkably, and in his eighteenth year his collected nightmare-lyrics made
a real sensation when issued under the title Azathoth and Other Horrors. He was a close
correspondent of the notorious Baudelairean poet Justin Geoffrey, who wrote The People of
the Monolith and died screaming in a madhouse in 1926 after a visit to a sinister, ill-regarded
village in Hungary. 
In self-reliance and practical affairs, however, Derby was greatly retarded
because of his coddled existence. His health had improved, but his habits of childish dependence
were fostered by overcareful parents; so that he never travelled alone, made independent decisions,
or assumed responsibilities. It was early seen that he would not be equal to a struggle in the
business or professional arena, but the family fortune was so ample that this formed no tragedy.
As he grew to years of manhood he retained a deceptive aspect of boyishness. Blond and blue-eyed,
he had the fresh complexion of a child; and his attempts to raise a moustache were discernible
only with difficulty. His voice was soft and light, and his pampered, unexercised life gave
him a juvenile chubbiness rather than the paunchiness of premature middle age. He was of good
height, and his handsome face would have made him a notable gallant had not his shyness held
him to seclusion and bookishness.
Derby’s parents took him abroad every summer, and he was quick to seize
on the surface aspects of European thought and expression. His Poe-like talents turned more
and more toward the decadent, and other artistic sensitivenesses and yearnings were half-aroused
in him. We had great discussions in those days. I had been through Harvard, had studied in a
Boston architect’s office, had married, and had finally returned to Arkham to practice
my profession—settling in the family homestead in Saltonstall St. since my father had
moved to Florida for his health. Edward used to call almost every evening, till I came to regard
him as one of the household. He had a characteristic way of ringing the doorbell or sounding
the knocker that grew to be a veritable code signal, so that after dinner I always listened
for the familiar three brisk strokes followed by two more after a pause. Less frequently I would
visit at his house and note with envy the obscure volumes in his constantly growing library.
Derby went through Miskatonic University in Arkham, since his parents would
not let him board away from them. He entered at sixteen and completed his course in three years,
majoring in English and French literature and receiving high marks in everything but mathematics
and the sciences. He mingled very little with the other students, though looking enviously at
the “daring” or “Bohemian” set—whose superficially “smart”
language and meaninglessly ironic pose he aped, and whose dubious conduct he wished he dared
adopt.
What he did do was to become an almost fanatical devotee of subterranean magical
lore, for which Miskatonic’s library was and is famous. Always a dweller on the surface
of phantasy and strangeness, he now delved deep into the actual runes and riddles left by a
fabulous past for the guidance or puzzlement of posterity. He read things like the frightful
Book of Eibon, the Unaussprechlichen Kulten of von Junzt, and the forbidden 
Necronomicon of the mad Arab Abdul Alhazred, though he did not tell his parents he had seen
them. Edward was twenty when my son and only child was born, and seemed pleased when I named
the newcomer Edward Derby Upton, after him.
By the time he was twenty-five Edward Derby was a prodigiously learned man
and a fairly well-known poet and fantaisiste, though his lack of contacts and responsibilities
had slowed down his literary growth by making his products derivative and overbookish. I was
perhaps his closest friend—finding him an inexhaustible mine of vital theoretical topics,
while he relied on me for advice in whatever matters he did not wish to refer to his parents.
He remained single—more through shyness, inertia, and parental protectiveness than through
inclination—and moved in society only to the slightest and most perfunctory extent. When
the war came both health and ingrained timidity kept him at home. I went to Plattsburg for a
commission, but never got overseas.
So the years wore on. Edward’s mother died when he was thirty-four, and
for months he was incapacitated by some odd psychological malady. His father took him to Europe,
however, and he managed to pull out of his trouble without visible effects. Afterward he seemed
to feel a sort of grotesque exhilaration, as if of partial escape from some unseen bondage.
He began to mingle in the more “advanced” college set despite his middle age, and
was present at some extremely wild doings—on one occasion paying heavy blackmail (which
he borrowed of me) to keep his presence at a certain affair from his father’s notice.
Some of the whispered rumours about the wild Miskatonic set were extremely singular. There was
even talk of black magic and of happenings utterly beyond credibility.
II.

Edward was thirty-eight when he met Asenath Waite. She was, I judge, about twenty-three at the
time; and was taking a special course in mediaeval metaphysics at Miskatonic. The daughter of
a friend of mine had met her before—in the Hall School at Kingsport—and had been
inclined to shun her because of her odd reputation. She was dark, smallish, and very good-looking
except for overprotuberant eyes; but something in her expression alienated extremely sensitive
people. It was, however, largely her origin and conversation which caused average folk to avoid
her. She was one of the Innsmouth Waites, and dark legends have clustered for generations about
crumbling, half-deserted Innsmouth and its people. There are tales of horrible bargains about
the year 1850, and of a strange element “not quite human” in the ancient families
of the run-down fishing port—tales such as only old-time Yankees can devise and repeat
with proper awesomeness.
Asenath’s case was aggravated by the fact that she was Ephraim Waite’s
daughter—the child of his old age by an unknown wife who always went veiled. Ephraim lived
in a half-decayed mansion in Washington Street, Innsmouth, and those who had seen the place
(Arkham folk avoid going to Innsmouth whenever they can) declared that the attic windows were
always boarded, and that strange sounds sometimes floated from within as evening drew on. The
old man was known to have been a prodigious magical student in his day, and legend averred that
he could raise or quell storms at sea according to his whim. I had seen him once or twice in
my youth as he came to Arkham to consult forbidden tomes at the college library, and had hated
his wolfish, saturnine face with its tangle of iron-grey beard. He had died insane—under
rather queer circumstances—just before his daughter (by his will made a nominal ward of
the principal) entered the Hall School, but she had been his morbidly avid pupil and looked
fiendishly like him at times.
The friend whose daughter had gone to school with Asenath Waite repeated many
curious things when the news of Edward’s acquaintance with her began to spread about.
Asenath, it seemed, had posed as a kind of magician at school; and had really seemed able to
accomplish some highly baffling marvels. She professed to be able to raise thunderstorms, though
her seeming success was generally laid to some uncanny knack at prediction. All animals markedly
disliked her, and she could make any dog howl by certain motions of her right hand. There were
times when she displayed snatches of knowledge and language very singular—and very shocking—for
a young girl; when she would frighten her schoolmates with leers and winks of an inexplicable
kind, and would seem to extract an obscene and zestful irony from her present situation.
Most unusual, though, were the well-attested cases of her influence over other
persons. She was, beyond question, a genuine hypnotist. By gazing peculiarly at a fellow-student
she would often give the latter a distinct feeling of exchanged personality—as
if the subject were placed momentarily in the magician’s body and able to stare half across
the room at her real body, whose eyes blazed and protruded with an alien expression. Asenath
often made wild claims about the nature of consciousness and about its independence of the physical
frame—or at least from the life-processes of the physical frame. Her crowning rage, however,
was that she was not a man; since she believed a male brain had certain unique and far-reaching
cosmic powers. Given a man’s brain, she declared, she could not only equal but surpass
her father in mastery of unknown forces. 
Edward met Asenath at a gathering of “intelligentsia” held in one
of the students’ rooms, and could talk of nothing else when he came to see me the next
day. He had found her full of the interests and erudition which engrossed him most, and was
in addition wildly taken with her appearance. I had never seen the young woman, and recalled
casual references only faintly, but I knew who she was. It seemed rather regrettable that Derby
should become so upheaved about her; but I said nothing to discourage him, since infatuation
thrives on opposition. He was not, he said, mentioning her to his father.
In the next few weeks I heard of very little but Asenath from young Derby.
Others now remarked Edward’s autumnal gallantry, though they agreed that he did not look
even nearly his actual age, or seem at all inappropriate as an escort for his bizarre divinity.
He was only a trifle paunchy despite his indolence and self-indulgence, and his face was absolutely
without lines. Asenath, on the other hand, had the premature crow’s feet which come from
the exercise of an intense will.
About this time Edward brought the girl to call on me, and I at once saw that
his interest was by no means one-sided. She eyed him continually with an almost predatory air,
and I perceived that their intimacy was beyond untangling. Soon afterward I had a visit from
old Mr. Derby, whom I had always admired and respected. He had heard the tales of his son’s
new friendship, and had wormed the whole truth out of “the boy”. Edward meant to
marry Asenath, and had even been looking at houses in the suburbs. Knowing my usually great
influence with his son, the father wondered if I could help to break the ill-advised affair
off; but I regretfully expressed my doubts. This time it was not a question of Edward’s
weak will but of the woman’s strong will. The perennial child had transferred his dependence
from the parental image to a new and stronger image, and nothing could be done about it.
The wedding was performed a month later—by a justice of the peace, according
to the bride’s request. Mr. Derby, at my advice, offered no opposition; and he, my wife,
my son, and I attended the brief ceremony—the other guests being wild young people from
the college. Asenath had bought the old Crowninshield place in the country at the end of High
Street, and they proposed to settle there after a short trip to Innsmouth, whence three servants
and some books and household goods were to be brought. It was probably not so much consideration
for Edward and his father as a personal wish to be near the college, its library, and its crowd
of “sophisticates”, that made Asenath settle in Arkham instead of returning permanently
home.
When Edward called on me after the honeymoon I thought he looked slightly changed.
Asenath had made him get rid of the undeveloped moustache, but there was more than that. He
looked soberer and more thoughtful, his habitual pout of childish rebelliousness being exchanged
for a look almost of genuine sadness. I was puzzled to decide whether I liked or disliked the
change. Certainly, he seemed for the moment more normally adult than ever before. Perhaps the
marriage was a good thing—might not the change of dependence form a start toward
actual neutralisation, leading ultimately to responsible independence? He came alone,
for Asenath was very busy. She had brought a vast store of books and apparatus from Innsmouth
(Derby shuddered as he spoke the name), and was finishing the restoration of the Crowninshield
house and grounds.
Her home in—that town—was a rather disquieting place, but certain
objects in it had taught him some surprising things. He was progressing fast in esoteric lore
now that he had Asenath’s guidance. Some of the experiments she proposed were very daring
and radical—he did not feel at liberty to describe them—but he had confidence in
her powers and intentions. The three servants were very queer—an incredibly aged couple
who had been with old Ephraim and referred occasionally to him and to Asenath’s dead mother
in a cryptic way, and a swarthy young wench who had marked anomalies of feature and seemed to
exude a perpetual odour of fish.
III.

For the next two years I saw less and less of Derby. A fortnight would sometimes slip by without
the familiar three-and-two strokes at the front door; and when he did call—or when, as
happened with increasing infrequency, I called on him—he was very little disposed to converse
on vital topics. He had become secretive about those occult studies which he used to describe
and discuss so minutely, and preferred not to talk of his wife. She had aged tremendously since
her marriage, till now—oddly enough—she seemed the elder of the two. Her face held
the most concentratedly determined expression I had ever seen, and her whole aspect seemed to
gain a vague, unplaceable repulsiveness. My wife and son noticed it as much as I, and we all
ceased gradually to call on her—for which, Edward admitted in one of his boyishly tactless
moments, she was unmitigatedly grateful. Occasionally the Derbys would go on long trips—ostensibly
to Europe, though Edward sometimes hinted at obscurer destinations. 
It was after the first year that people began talking about the change in Edward
Derby. It was very casual talk, for the change was purely psychological; but it brought up some
interesting points. Now and then, it seemed, Edward was observed to wear an expression and to
do things wholly incompatible with his usual flabby nature. For example—although in the
old days he could not drive a car, he was now seen occasionally to dash into or out of the old
Crowninshield driveway with Asenath’s powerful Packard, handling it like a master, and
meeting traffic entanglements with a skill and determination utterly alien to his accustomed
nature. In such cases he seemed always to be just back from some trip or just starting on one—what
sort of trip, no one could guess, although he mostly favoured the Innsmouth road.
Oddly, the metamorphosis did not seem altogether pleasing. People said he looked
too much like his wife, or like old Ephraim Waite himself, in these moments—or perhaps
these moments seemed unnatural because they were so rare. Sometimes, hours after starting out
in this way, he would return listlessly sprawled on the rear seat of the car while an obviously
hired chauffeur or mechanic drove. Also, his preponderant aspect on the streets during his decreasing
round of social contacts (including, I may say, his calls on me) was the old-time indecisive
one—its irresponsible childishness even more marked than in the past. While Asenath’s
face aged, Edward’s—aside from those exceptional occasions—actually relaxed
into a kind of exaggerated immaturity, save when a trace of the new sadness or understanding
would flash across it. It was really very puzzling. Meanwhile the Derbys almost dropped out
of the gay college circle—not through their own disgust, we heard, but because something
about their present studies shocked even the most callous of the other decadents. 
It was in the third year of the marriage that Edward began to hint openly to
me of a certain fear and dissatisfaction. He would let fall remarks about things ‘going
too far’, and would talk darkly about the need of ‘saving his identity’. At
first I ignored such references, but in time I began to question him guardedly, remembering
what my friend’s daughter had said about Asenath’s hypnotic influence over the other
girls at school—the cases where students had thought they were in her body looking across
the room at themselves. This questioning seemed to make him at once alarmed and grateful, and
once he mumbled something about having a serious talk with me later.
About this time old Mr. Derby died, for which I was afterward very thankful.
Edward was badly upset, though by no means disorganised. He had seen astonishingly little of
his parent since his marriage, for Asenath had concentrated in herself all his vital sense of
family linkage. Some called him callous in his loss—especially since those jaunty and
confident moods in the car began to increase. He now wished to move back into the old Derby
mansion, but Asenath insisted on staying in the Crowninshield house, to which she had become
well adjusted.
Not long afterward my wife heard a curious thing from a friend—one of
the few who had not dropped the Derbys. She had been out to the end of High St. to call on the
couple, and had seen a car shoot briskly out of the drive with Edward’s oddly confident
and almost sneering face above the wheel. Ringing the bell, she had been told by the repulsive
wench that Asenath was also out; but had chanced to look up at the house in leaving. There,
at one of Edward’s library windows, she had glimpsed a hastily withdrawn face—a
face whose expression of pain, defeat, and wistful hopelessness was poignant beyond description.
It was—incredibly enough in view of its usual domineering cast—Asenath’s;
yet the caller had vowed that in that instant the sad, muddled eyes of poor Edward were gazing
out from it. 
Edward’s calls now grew a trifle more frequent, and his hints occasionally
became concrete. What he said was not to be believed, even in centuried and legend-haunted Arkham;
but he threw out his dark lore with a sincerity and convincingness which made one fear for his
sanity. He talked about terrible meetings in lonely places, of Cyclopean ruins in the heart
of the Maine woods beneath which vast staircases lead down to abysses of nighted secrets, of
complex angles that lead through invisible walls to other regions of space and time, and of
hideous exchanges of personality that permitted explorations in remote and forbidden places,
on other worlds, and in different space-time continua.
He would now and then back up certain crazy hints by exhibiting objects which
utterly nonplussed me—elusively coloured and bafflingly textured objects like nothing
ever heard of on earth, whose insane curves and surfaces answered no conceivable purpose and
followed no conceivable geometry. These things, he said, came ‘from outside’; and
his wife knew how to get them. Sometimes—but always in frightened and ambiguous whispers—he
would suggest things about old Ephraim Waite, whom he had seen occasionally at the college library
in the old days. These adumbrations were never specific, but seemed to revolve around some especially
horrible doubt as to whether the old wizard were really dead—in a spiritual as well as
corporeal sense.
At times Derby would halt abruptly in his revelations, and I wondered whether
Asenath could possibly have divined his speech at a distance and cut him off through some unknown
sort of telepathic mesmerism—some power of the kind she had displayed at school. Certainly,
she suspected that he told me things, for as the weeks passed she tried to stop his visits with
words and glances of a most inexplicable potency. Only with difficulty could he get to see me,
for although he would pretend to be going somewhere else, some invisible force would generally
clog his motions or make him forget his destination for the time being. His visits usually came
when Asenath was away—‘away in her own body’, as he once oddly put it. She
always found out later—the servants watched his goings and comings—but evidently
she thought it inexpedient to do anything drastic.
IV.

Derby had been married more than three years on that August day when I got the telegram from
Maine. I had not seen him for two months, but had heard he was away “on business”.
Asenath was supposed to be with him, though watchful gossips declared there was someone upstairs
in the house behind the doubly curtained windows. They had watched the purchases made by the
servants. And now the town marshal of Chesuncook had wired of the draggled madman who stumbled
out of the woods with delirious ravings and screamed to me for protection. It was Edward—and
he had been just able to recall his own name and my name and address.
Chesuncook is close to the wildest, deepest, and least explored forest belt
in Maine, and it took a whole day of feverish jolting through fantastic and forbidding scenery
to get there in a car. I found Derby in a cell at the town farm, vacillating between frenzy
and apathy. He knew me at once, and began pouring out a meaningless, half-incoherent torrent
of words in my direction.
“Dan—for God’s sake! The pit of the shoggoths! Down the six
thousand steps . . . the abomination of abominations . . . I never
would let her take me, and then I found myself there. . . . Iä!
Shub-Niggurath! . . . The shape rose up from the altar, and there were 500 that howled. . . .
The Hooded Thing bleated ‘Kamog! Kamog!’—that was old Ephraim’s secret
name in the coven. . . . I was there, where she promised she wouldn’t take
me. . . . A minute before I was locked in the library, and then I was there where
she had gone with my body—in the place of utter blasphemy, the unholy pit where the black
realm begins and the watcher guards the gate. . . . I saw a shoggoth—it
changed shape. . . . I can’t stand it. . . . I won’t
stand it. . . . I’ll kill her if she ever sends me there again. . . .
I’ll kill that entity . . . her, him, it . . . I’ll
kill it! I’ll kill it with my own hands!”
It took me an hour to quiet him, but he subsided at last. The next day I got
him decent clothes in the village, and set out with him for Arkham. His fury of hysteria was
spent, and he was inclined to be silent; though he began muttering darkly to himself when the
car passed through Augusta—as if the sight of a city aroused unpleasant memories. It was
clear that he did not wish to go home; and considering the fantastic delusions he seemed to
have about his wife—delusions undoubtedly springing from some actual hypnotic ordeal to
which he had been subjected—I thought it would be better if he did not. I would, I resolved,
put him up myself for a time; no matter what unpleasantness it would make with Asenath. Later
I would help him get a divorce, for most assuredly there were mental factors which made this
marriage suicidal for him. When we struck open country again Derby’s muttering faded away,
and I let him nod and drowse on the seat beside me as I drove.
During our sunset dash through Portland the muttering commenced again, more
distinctly than before, and as I listened I caught a stream of utterly insane drivel about Asenath.
The extent to which she had preyed on Edward’s nerves was plain, for he had woven a whole
set of hallucinations around her. His present predicament, he mumbled furtively, was only one
of a long series. She was getting hold of him, and he knew that some day she would never let
go. Even now she probably let him go only when she had to, because she couldn’t hold on
long at a time. She constantly took his body and went to nameless places for nameless rites,
leaving him in her body and locking him upstairs—but sometimes she couldn’t hold
on, and he would find himself suddenly in his own body again in some far-off, horrible, and
perhaps unknown place. Sometimes she’d get hold of him again and sometimes she couldn’t.
Often he was left stranded somewhere as I had found him . . . time and again
he had to find his way home from frightful distances, getting somebody to drive the car after
he found it.
The worst thing was that she was holding on to him longer and longer at a time.
She wanted to be a man—to be fully human—that was why she got hold of him. She had
sensed the mixture of fine-wrought brain and weak will in him. Some day she would crowd him
out and disappear with his body—disappear to become a great magician like her father and
leave him marooned in that female shell that wasn’t even quite human. Yes, he knew about
the Innsmouth blood now. There had been traffick with things from the sea—it was
horrible. . . . And old Ephraim—he had known the secret, and when he grew old
did a hideous thing to keep alive . . . he wanted to live
forever . . . Asenath would succeed—one successful demonstration had taken
place already.
As Derby muttered on I turned to look at him closely, verifying the impression
of change which an earlier scrutiny had given me. Paradoxically, he seemed in better shape than
usual—harder, more normally developed, and without the trace of sickly flabbiness caused
by his indolent habits. It was as if he had been really active and properly exercised for the
first time in his coddled life, and I judged that Asenath’s force must have pushed him
into unwonted channels of motion and alertness. But just now his mind was in a pitiable state;
for he was mumbling wild extravagances about his wife, about black magic, about old Ephraim,
and about some revelation which would convince even me. He repeated names which I recognised
from bygone browsings in forbidden volumes, and at times made me shudder with a certain thread
of mythological consistency—of convincing coherence—which ran through his maundering.
Again and again he would pause, as if to gather courage for some final and terrible disclosure.
“Dan, Dan, don’t you remember him—the wild eyes and the unkempt
beard that never turned white? He glared at me once, and I never forgot it. Now she glares
that way. And I know why! He found it in the Necronomicon—the formula. I
don’t dare tell you the page yet, but when I do you can read and understand. Then you
will know what has engulfed me. On, on, on, on—body to body to body—he means never
to die. The life-glow—he knows how to break the link . . . it can flicker
on a while even when the body is dead. I’ll give you hints, and maybe you’ll guess.
Listen, Dan—do you know why my wife always takes such pains with that silly backhand writing?
Have you ever seen a manuscript of old Ephraim’s? Do you want to know why I shivered when
I saw some hasty notes Asenath had jotted down? 
“Asenath . . . is there such a person? Why did
they half think there was poison in old Ephraim’s stomach? Why do the Gilmans whisper
about the way he shrieked—like a frightened child—when he went mad and Asenath locked
him up in the padded attic room where—the other—had been? Was it old Ephraim’s
soul that was locked in? Who locked in whom? Why had he been looking for months for someone
with a fine mind and a weak will? Why did he curse that his daughter wasn’t a son? Tell
me, Daniel Upton—what devilish exchange was perpetrated in the house of horror where
that blasphemous monster had his trusting, weak-willed, half-human child at his mercy? Didn’t
he make it permanent—as she’ll do in the end with me? Tell me why that thing that
calls itself Asenath writes differently when off guard, so that you can’t tell its
script from . . .”
Then the thing happened. Derby’s voice was rising to a thin treble scream
as he raved, when suddenly it was shut off with an almost mechanical click. I thought of those
other occasions at my home when his confidences had abruptly ceased—when I had half fancied
that some obscure telepathic wave of Asenath’s mental force was intervening to keep him
silent. This, though, was something altogether different—and, I felt, infinitely more
horrible. The face beside me was twisted almost unrecognisably for a moment, while through the
whole body there passed a shivering motion—as if all the bones, organs, muscles, nerves,
and glands were readjusting themselves to a radically different posture, set of stresses, and
general personality.
Just where the supreme horror lay, I could not for my life tell; yet there
swept over me such a swamping wave of sickness and repulsion—such a freezing, petrifying
sense of utter alienage and abnormality—that my grasp of the wheel grew feeble and uncertain.
The figure beside me seemed less like a lifelong friend than like some monstrous intrusion from
outer space—some damnable, utterly accursed focus of unknown and malign cosmic forces.
I had faltered only a moment, but before another moment was over my companion
had seized the wheel and forced me to change places with him. The dusk was now very thick, and
the lights of Portland far behind, so I could not see much of his face. The blaze of his eyes,
though, was phenomenal; and I knew that he must now be in that queerly energised state—so
unlike his usual self—which so many people had noticed. It seemed odd and incredible that
listless Edward Derby—he who could never assert himself, and who had never learned to
drive—should be ordering me about and taking the wheel of my own car, yet that was precisely
what had happened. He did not speak for some time, and in my inexplicable horror I was glad
he did not.
In the lights of Biddeford and Saco I saw his firmly set mouth, and shivered
at the blaze of his eyes. The people were right—he did look damnably like his wife and
like old Ephraim when in these moods. I did not wonder that the moods were disliked—there
was certainly something unnatural and diabolic in them, and I felt the sinister element all
the more because of the wild ravings I had been hearing. This man, for all my lifelong knowledge
of Edward Pickman Derby, was a stranger—an intrusion of some sort from the black abyss.
He did not speak until we were on a dark stretch of road, and when he did his
voice seemed utterly unfamiliar. It was deeper, firmer, and more decisive than I had ever known
it to be; while its accent and pronunciation were altogether changed—though vaguely, remotely,
and rather disturbingly recalling something I could not quite place. There was, I thought, a
trace of very profound and very genuine irony in the timbre—not the flashy, meaninglessly
jaunty pseudo-irony of the callow “sophisticate”, which Derby had habitually affected,
but something grim, basic, pervasive, and potentially evil. I marvelled at the self-possession
so soon following the spell of panic-struck muttering.
“I hope you’ll forget my attack back there, Upton,” he was
saying. “You know what my nerves are, and I guess you can excuse such things. I’m
enormously grateful, of course, for this lift home.
“And you must forget, too, any crazy things I may have been saying about
my wife—and about things in general. That’s what comes from overstudy in a field
like mine. My philosophy is full of bizarre concepts, and when the mind gets worn out it cooks
up all sorts of imaginary concrete applications. I shall take a rest from now on—you probably
won’t see me for some time, and you needn’t blame Asenath for it.
“This trip was a bit queer, but it’s really very simple. There
are certain Indian relics in the north woods—standing stones, and all that—which
mean a good deal in folklore, and Asenath and I are following that stuff up. It was a hard search,
so I seem to have gone off my head. I must send somebody for the car when I get home. A month’s
relaxation will put me back on my feet.”
I do not recall just what my own part of the conversation was, for the baffling
alienage of my seatmate filled all my consciousness. With every moment my feeling of elusive
cosmic horror increased, till at length I was in a virtual delirium of longing for the end of
the drive. Derby did not offer to relinquish the wheel, and I was glad of the speed with which
Portsmouth and Newburyport flashed by. 
At the junction where the main highway runs inland and avoids Innsmouth I was
half afraid my driver would take the bleak shore road that goes through that damnable place.
He did not, however, but darted rapidly past Rowley and Ipswich toward our destination. We reached
Arkham before midnight, and found the lights still on at the old Crowninshield house. Derby
left the car with a hasty repetition of his thanks, and I drove home alone with a curious feeling
of relief. It had been a terrible drive—all the more terrible because I could not quite
tell why—and I did not regret Derby’s forecast of a long absence from my company.
V.

The next two months were full of rumours. People spoke of seeing Derby more and more in his
new energised state, and Asenath was scarcely ever in to her few callers. I had only one visit
from Edward, when he called briefly in Asenath’s car—duly reclaimed from wherever
he had left it in Maine—to get some books he had lent me. He was in his new state, and
paused only long enough for some evasively polite remarks. It was plain that he had nothing
to discuss with me when in this condition—and I noticed that he did not even trouble to
give the old three-and-two signal when ringing the doorbell. As on that evening in the car,
I felt a faint, infinitely deep horror which I could not explain; so that his swift departure
was a prodigious relief.
In mid-September Derby was away for a week, and some of the decadent college
set talked knowingly of the matter—hinting at a meeting with a notorious cult-leader,
lately expelled from England, who had established headquarters in New York. For my part I could
not get that strange ride from Maine out of my head. The transformation I had witnessed had
affected me profoundly, and I caught myself again and again trying to account for the thing—and
for the extreme horror it had inspired in me.
But the oddest rumours were those about the sobbing in the old Crowninshield
house. The voice seemed to be a woman’s, and some of the younger people thought it sounded
like Asenath’s. It was heard only at rare intervals, and would sometimes be choked off
as if by force. There was talk of an investigation, but this was dispelled one day when Asenath
appeared in the streets and chatted in a sprightly way with a large number of acquaintances—apologising
for her recent absences and speaking incidentally about the nervous breakdown and hysteria of
a guest from Boston. The guest was never seen, but Asenath’s appearance left nothing to
be said. And then someone complicated matters by whispering that the sobs had once or twice
been in a man’s voice.
One evening in mid-October I heard the familiar three-and-two ring at the front
door. Answering it myself, I found Edward on the steps, and saw in a moment that his personality
was the old one which I had not encountered since the day of his ravings on that terrible ride
from Chesuncook. His face was twitching with a mixture of odd emotions in which fear and triumph
seemed to share dominion, and he looked furtively over his shoulder as I closed the door behind
him.
Following me clumsily to the study, he asked for some whiskey to steady his
nerves. I forbore to question him, but waited till he felt like beginning whatever he wanted
to say. At length he ventured some information in a choking voice.
“Asenath has gone, Dan. We had a long talk last night while the servants
were out, and I made her promise to stop preying on me. Of course I had certain—certain
occult defences I never told you about. She had to give in, but got frightfully angry. Just
packed up and started for New York—walked right out to catch the 8:20 in to Boston. I
suppose people will talk, but I can’t help that. You needn’t mention that there
was any trouble—just say she’s gone on a long research trip.
“She’s probably going to stay with one of her horrible groups of
devotees. I hope she’ll go west and get a divorce—anyhow, I’ve made her promise
to keep away and let me alone. It was horrible, Dan—she was stealing my body—crowding
me out—making a prisoner of me. I laid low and pretended to let her do it, but I had to
be on the watch. I could plan if I was careful, for she can’t read my mind literally,
or in detail. All she could read of my planning was a sort of general mood of rebellion—and
she always thought I was helpless. Never thought I could get the best of her . . .
but I had a spell or two that worked.”
Derby looked over his shoulder and took some more whiskey.
“I paid off those damned servants this morning when they got back. They
were ugly about it, and asked questions, but they went. They’re her kind—Innsmouth
people—and were hand and glove with her. I hope they’ll let me alone—I didn’t
like the way they laughed when they walked away. I must get as many of Dad’s old servants
again as I can. I’ll move back home now.
“I suppose you think I’m crazy, Dan—but Arkham history ought
to hint at things that back up what I’ve told you—and what I’m going to tell
you. You’ve seen one of the changes, too—in your car after I told you about Asenath
that day coming home from Maine. That was when she got me—drove me out of my body. The
last thing of the ride I remember was when I was all worked up trying to tell you what that
she-devil is. Then she got me, and in a flash I was back at the house—in the library
where those damned servants had me locked up—and in that cursed fiend’s body . . .
that isn’t even human. . . . You know, it was she you must have ridden
home with . . . that preying wolf in my body. . . . You ought
to have known the difference!”
I shuddered as Derby paused. Surely, I had known the difference—yet
could I accept an explanation as insane as this? But my distracted caller was growing even wilder.
“I had to save myself—I had to, Dan! She’d have got me for
good at Hallowmass—they hold a Sabbat up there beyond Chesuncook, and the sacrifice would
have clinched things. She’d have got me for good . . . she’d have
been I, and I’d have been she . . . forever . . . too late. . . .
My body’d have been hers for good. . . . She’d have been a man, and
fully human, just as she wanted to be. . . . I suppose she’d have put me
out of the way—killed her own ex-body with me in it, damn her, just as she did before—just
as she, he, or it did before. . . .”
Edward’s face was now atrociously distorted, and he bent it uncomfortably
close to mine as his voice fell to a whisper.
“You must know what I hinted in the car—that she isn’t
Asenath at all, but really old Ephraim himself. I suspected it a year and a half ago, but
I know it now. Her handwriting shews it when she’s off guard—sometimes she jots
down a note in writing that’s just like her father’s manuscripts, stroke for stroke—and
sometimes she says things that nobody but an old man like Ephraim could say. He changed forms
with her when he felt death coming—she was the only one he could find with the right kind
of brain and a weak enough will—he got her body permanently, just as she almost got mine,
and then poisoned the old body he’d put her into. Haven’t you seen old Ephraim’s
soul glaring out of that she-devil’s eyes dozens of times . . . and out
of mine when she had control of my body?”
The whisperer was panting, and paused for breath. I said nothing, and when
he resumed his voice was nearer normal. This, I reflected, was a case for the asylum, but I
would not be the one to send him there. Perhaps time and freedom from Asenath would do its work.
I could see that he would never wish to dabble in morbid occultism again.
“I’ll tell you more later—I must have a long rest now. I’ll
tell you something of the forbidden horrors she led me into—something of the age-old horrors
that even now are festering in out-of-the-way corners with a few monstrous priests to keep them
alive. Some people know things about the universe that nobody ought to know, and can do things
that nobody ought to be able to do. I’ve been in it up to my neck, but that’s the
end. Today I’d burn that damned Necronomicon and all the rest if I were librarian
at Miskatonic.
“But she can’t get me now. I must get out of that accursed house
as soon as I can, and settle down at home. You’ll help me, I know, if I need help. Those
devilish servants, you know . . . and if people should get too inquisitive about
Asenath. You see, I can’t give them her address. . . . Then there are certain
groups of searchers—certain cults, you know—that might misunderstand our breaking
up . . . some of them have damnably curious ideas and methods. I know you’ll
stand by me if anything happens—even if I have to tell you a lot that will shock you. . . .”
I had Edward stay and sleep in one of the guest-chambers that night, and in
the morning he seemed calmer. We discussed certain possible arrangements for his moving back
into the Derby mansion, and I hoped he would lose no time in making the change. He did not call
the next evening, but I saw him frequently during the ensuing weeks. We talked as little as
possible about strange and unpleasant things, but discussed the renovation of the old Derby
house, and the travels which Edward promised to take with my son and me the following summer.
Of Asenath we said almost nothing, for I saw that the subject was a peculiarly
disturbing one. Gossip, of course, was rife; but that was no novelty in connexion with the strange
ménage at the old Crowninshield house. One thing I did not like was what Derby’s
banker let fall in an overexpansive mood at the Miskatonic Club—about the cheques Edward
was sending regularly to a Moses and Abigail Sargent and a Eunice Babson in Innsmouth. That
looked as if those evil-faced servants were extorting some kind of tribute from him—yet
he had not mentioned the matter to me.
I wished that the summer—and my son’s Harvard vacation—would
come, so that we could get Edward to Europe. He was not, I soon saw, mending as rapidly as I
had hoped he would; for there was something a bit hysterical in his occasional exhilaration,
while his moods of fright and depression were altogether too frequent. The old Derby house was
ready by December, yet Edward constantly put off moving. Though he hated and seemed to fear
the Crowninshield place, he was at the same time queerly enslaved by it. He could not seem to
begin dismantling things, and invented every kind of excuse to postpone action. When I pointed
this out to him he appeared unaccountably frightened. His father’s old butler—who
was there with other reacquired family servants—told me one day that Edward’s occasional
prowlings about the house, and especially down cellar, looked odd and unwholesome to him. I
wondered if Asenath had been writing disturbing letters, but the butler said there was no mail
which could have come from her.
VI.

It was about Christmas that Derby broke down one evening while calling on me. I was steering
the conversation toward next summer’s travels when he suddenly shrieked and leaped up
from his chair with a look of shocking, uncontrollable fright—a cosmic panic and loathing
such as only the nether gulfs of nightmare could bring to any sane mind.
“My brain! My brain! God, Dan—it’s tugging—from beyond—knocking—clawing—that
she-devil—even now—Ephraim—Kamog! Kamog!—The pit of the shoggoths—Iä!
Shub-Niggurath! The Goat with a Thousand Young! . . . 
“The flame—the flame . . . beyond body, beyond life . . .
in the earth . . . oh, God! . . .”
I pulled him back to his chair and poured some wine down his throat as his
frenzy sank to a dull apathy. He did not resist, but kept his lips moving as if talking to himself.
Presently I realised that he was trying to talk to me, and bent my ear to his mouth to catch
the feeble words.
“ . . . again, again . . . she’s
trying . . . I might have known . . . nothing can stop that force;
not distance, nor magic, nor death . . . it comes and comes, mostly in the night . . .
I can’t leave . . . it’s horrible . . . oh, God, Dan, 
if you only knew as I do just how horrible it is. . . .”
When he had slumped down into a stupor I propped him with pillows and let normal
sleep overtake him. I did not call a doctor, for I knew what would be said of his sanity, and
wished to give nature a chance if I possibly could. He waked at midnight, and I put him to bed
upstairs, but he was gone by morning. He had let himself quietly out of the house—and
his butler, when called on the wire, said he was at home pacing restlessly about the library.
Edward went to pieces rapidly after that. He did not call again, but I went
daily to see him. He would always be sitting in his library, staring at nothing and having an
air of abnormal listening. Sometimes he talked rationally, but always on trivial topics.
Any mention of his trouble, of future plans, or of Asenath would send him into a frenzy. His
butler said he had frightful seizures at night, during which he might eventually do himself
harm.
I had a long talk with his doctor, banker, and lawyer, and finally took the
physician with two specialist colleagues to visit him. The spasms that resulted from the first
questions were violent and pitiable—and that evening a closed car took his poor struggling
body to the Arkham Sanitarium. I was made his guardian and called on him twice weekly—almost
weeping to hear his wild shrieks, awesome whispers, and dreadful, droning repetitions of such
phrases as “I had to do it—I had to do it . . . it’ll get me . . .
it’ll get me . . . down there . . . down there in the dark. . . .
Mother, mother! Dan! Save me . . . save me. . . .”
How much hope of recovery there was, no one could say; but I tried my best
to be optimistic. Edward must have a home if he emerged, so I transferred his servants to the
Derby mansion, which would surely be his sane choice. What to do about the Crowninshield place
with its complex arrangements and collections of utterly inexplicable objects I could not decide,
so left it momentarily untouched—telling the Derby housemaid to go over and dust the chief
rooms once a week, and ordering the furnace man to have a fire on those days.
The final nightmare came before Candlemas—heralded, in cruel irony, by
a false gleam of hope. One morning late in January the sanitarium telephoned to report that
Edward’s reason had suddenly come back. His continuous memory, they said, was badly impaired;
but sanity itself was certain. Of course he must remain some time for observation, but there
could be little doubt of the outcome. All going well, he would surely be free in a week.
I hastened over in a flood of delight, but stood bewildered when a nurse took
me to Edward’s room. The patient rose to greet me, extending his hand with a polite smile;
but I saw in an instant that he bore the strangely energised personality which had seemed so
foreign to his own nature—the competent personality I had found so vaguely horrible, and
which Edward himself had once vowed was the intruding soul of his wife. There was the same blazing
vision—so like Asenath’s and old Ephraim’s—and the same firm mouth;
and when he spoke I could sense the same grim, pervasive irony in his voice—the deep irony
so redolent of potential evil. This was the person who had driven my car through the night five
months before—the person I had not seen since that brief call when he had forgotten the
old-time doorbell signal and stirred such nebulous fears in me—and now he filled me with
the same dim feeling of blasphemous alienage and ineffable cosmic hideousness.
He spoke affably of arrangements for release—and there was nothing for
me to do but assent, despite some remarkable gaps in his recent memories. Yet I felt that something
was terribly, inexplicably wrong and abnormal. There were horrors in this thing that I could
not reach. This was a sane person—but was it indeed the Edward Derby I had known? If not,
who or what was it—and where was Edward? Ought it to be free or confined . . .
or ought it to be extirpated from the face of the earth? There was a hint of the abysmally sardonic
in everything the creature said—the Asenath-like eyes lent a special and baffling mockery
to certain words about the ‘early liberty earned by an especially close confinement’.
I must have behaved very awkwardly, and was glad to beat a retreat.
All that day and the next I racked my brain over the problem. What had happened?
What sort of mind looked out through those alien eyes in Edward’s face? I could think
of nothing but this dimly terrible enigma, and gave up all efforts to perform my usual work.
The second morning the hospital called up to say that the recovered patient was unchanged, and
by evening I was close to a nervous collapse—a state I admit, though others will vow it
coloured my subsequent vision. I have nothing to say on this point except that no madness of
mine could account for all the evidence.
VII.

It was in the night—after that second evening—that stark, utter horror burst over
me and weighted my spirit with a black, clutching panic from which it can never shake free.
It began with a telephone call just before midnight. I was the only one up, and sleepily took
down the receiver in the library. No one seemed to be on the wire, and I was about to hang up
and go to bed when my ear caught a very faint suspicion of sound at the other end. Was someone
trying under great difficulties to talk? As I listened I thought I heard a sort of half-liquid
bubbling noise—“glub . . . glub . . . glub”—which
had an odd suggestion of inarticulate, unintelligible word and syllable divisions. I called,
“Who is it?” But the only answer was “glub-glub . . . glub-glub.”
I could only assume that the noise was mechanical; but fancying that it might be a case of a
broken instrument able to receive but not to send, I added, “I can’t hear you. Better
hang up and try Information.” Immediately I heard the receiver go on the hook at the other
end.
This, I say, was just before midnight. When that call was traced afterward
it was found to come from the old Crowninshield house, though it was fully half a week from
the housemaid’s day to be there. I shall only hint what was found at that house—the
upheaval in a remote cellar storeroom, the tracks, the dirt, the hastily rifled wardrobe, the
baffling marks on the telephone, the clumsily used stationery, and the detestable stench lingering
over everything. The police, poor fools, have their smug little theories, and are still searching
for those sinister discharged servants—who have dropped out of sight amidst the present
furore. They speak of a ghoulish revenge for things that were done, and say I was included because
I was Edward’s best friend and adviser.
Idiots!—do they fancy those brutish clowns could have forged that handwriting?
Do they fancy they could have brought what later came? Are they blind to the changes in that
body that was Edward’s? As for me, I now believe all that Edward Derby ever told me.
There are horrors beyond life’s edge that we do not suspect, and once in a while man’s
evil prying calls them just within our range. Ephraim—Asenath—that devil called
them in, and they engulfed Edward as they are engulfing me.
Can I be sure that I am safe? Those powers survive the life of the physical
form. The next day—in the afternoon, when I pulled out of my prostration and was able
to walk and talk coherently—I went to the madhouse and shot him dead for Edward’s
and the world’s sake, but can I be sure till he is cremated? They are keeping the body
for some silly autopsies by different doctors—but I say he must be cremated. He must
be cremated—he who was not Edward Derby when I shot him. I shall go mad if he is not,
for I may be the next. But my will is not weak—and I shall not let it be undermined by
the terrors I know are seething around it. One life—Ephraim, Asenath, and Edward—who
now? I will not be driven out of my body . . . I will not change
souls with that bullet-ridden lich in the madhouse!
But let me try to tell coherently of that final horror. I will not speak of
what the police persistently ignored—the tales of that dwarfed, grotesque, malodorous
thing met by at least three wayfarers in High St. just before two o’clock, and the nature
of the single footprints in certain places. I will say only that just about two the doorbell
and knocker waked me—doorbell and knocker both, plied alternately and uncertainly in a
kind of weak desperation, and each trying to keep to Edward’s old signal of three-and-two
strokes.
Roused from sound sleep, my mind leaped into a turmoil. Derby at the door—and
remembering the old code! That new personality had not remembered it . . . was
Edward suddenly back in his rightful state? Why was he here in such evident stress and haste?
Had he been released ahead of time, or had he escaped? Perhaps, I thought as I flung on a robe
and bounded downstairs, his return to his own self had brought raving and violence, revoking
his discharge and driving him to a desperate dash for freedom. Whatever had happened, he was
good old Edward again, and I would help him!
When I opened the door into the elm-arched blackness a gust of insufferably
foetid wind almost flung me prostrate. I choked in nausea, and for a second scarcely saw the
dwarfed, humped figure on the steps. The summons had been Edward’s, but who was this foul,
stunted parody? Where had Edward had time to go? His ring had sounded only a second before the
door opened.
The caller had on one of Edward’s overcoats—its bottom almost touching
the ground, and its sleeves rolled back yet still covering the hands. On the head was a slouch
hat pulled low, while a black silk muffler concealed the face. As I stepped unsteadily forward,
the figure made a semi-liquid sound like that I had heard over the telephone—“glub . . .
glub . . .”—and thrust at me a large, closely written paper impaled
on the end of a long pencil. Still reeling from the morbid and unaccountable foetor, I seized
this paper and tried to read it in the light from the doorway.
Beyond question, it was in Edward’s script. But why had he written when
he was close enough to ring—and why was the script so awkward, coarse, and shaky? I could
make out nothing in the dim half light, so edged back into the hall, the dwarf figure clumping
mechanically after but pausing on the inner door’s threshold. The odour of this singular
messenger was really appalling, and I hoped (not in vain, thank God!) that my wife would not
wake and confront it.
Then, as I read the paper, I felt my knees give under me and my vision go black.
I was lying on the floor when I came to, that accursed sheet still clutched in my fear-rigid
hand. This is what it said.

“Dan—go to the sanitarium and kill it. Exterminate it. It isn’t
Edward Derby any more. She got me—it’s Asenath—and she has been dead three
months and a half. I lied when I said she had gone away. I killed her. I had to. It was
sudden, but we were alone and I was in my right body. I saw a candlestick and smashed her head
in. She would have got me for good at Hallowmass.
“I buried her in the farther cellar storeroom under some old boxes and
cleaned up all the traces. The servants suspected next morning, but they have such secrets that
they dare not tell the police. I sent them off, but God knows what they—and others of
the cult—will do.
“I thought for a while I was all right, and then I felt the tugging at
my brain. I knew what it was—I ought to have remembered. A soul like hers—or Ephraim’s—is
half detached, and keeps right on after death as long as the body lasts. She was getting me—making
me change bodies with her—seizing my body and putting me in that corpse of hers buried
in the cellar.
“I knew what was coming—that’s why I snapped and had to go
to the asylum. Then it came—I found myself choked in the dark—in Asenath’s
rotting carcass down there in the cellar under the boxes where I put it. And I knew she must
be in my body at the sanitarium—permanently, for it was after Hallowmass, and the
sacrifice would work even without her being there—sane, and ready for release as a menace
to the world. I was desperate, and in spite of everything I clawed my way out.
“I’m too far gone to talk—I couldn’t manage to telephone—but
I can still write. I’ll get fixed up somehow and bring you this last word and warning.
Kill that fiend if you value the peace and comfort of the world. See that it is cremated.
If you don’t, it will live on and on, body to body forever, and I can’t tell
you what it will do. Keep clear of black magic, Dan, it’s the devil’s business.
Goodbye—you’ve been a great friend. Tell the police whatever they’ll believe—and
I’m damnably sorry to drag all this on you. I’ll be at peace before long—this
thing won’t hold together much more. Hope you can read this. And kill that thing—kill
it.
Yours—Ed.”
It was only afterward that I read the last half of this paper, for I had fainted
at the end of the third paragraph. I fainted again when I saw and smelled what cluttered up
the threshold where the warm air had struck it. The messenger would not move or have consciousness
any more.
The butler, tougher-fibred than I, did not faint at what met him in the hall
in the morning. Instead, he telephoned the police. When they came I had been taken upstairs
to bed, but the—other mass—lay where it had collapsed in the night. The men put
handkerchiefs to their noses.
What they finally found inside Edward’s oddly assorted clothes was mostly
liquescent horror. There were bones, too—and a crushed-in skull. Some dental work positively
identified the skull as Asenath’s.


The Trap


It was on a certain Thursday morning in December that the whole thing began with that unaccountable
motion I thought I saw in my antique Copenhagen mirror. Something, it seemed to me, stirred—something
reflected in the glass, though I was alone in my quarters. I paused and looked intently, then,
deciding that the effect must be a pure illusion, resumed the interrupted brushing of my hair.
I had discovered the old mirror, covered with dust and cobwebs, in an outbuilding
of an abandoned estate-house in Santa Cruz’s sparsely settled Northside territory, and
had brought it to the United States from the Virgin Islands. The venerable glass was dim from
more than two hundred years’ exposure to a tropical climate, and the graceful ornamentation
along the top of the gilt frame had been badly smashed. I had had the detached pieces set back
into the frame before placing it in storage with my other belongings.
Now, several years later, I was staying half as a guest and half as a tutor
at the private school of my old friend Browne on a windy Connecticut hillside—occupying
an unused wing in one of the dormitories, where I had two rooms and a hallway to myself. The
old mirror, stowed securely in mattresses, was the first of my possessions to be unpacked on
my arrival; and I had set it up majestically in the living-room, on top of an old rosewood console
which had belonged to my great-grandmother.
The door of my bedroom was just opposite that of the living-room, with a hallway
between; and I had noticed that by looking into my chiffonier glass I could see the larger mirror
through the two doorways—which was exactly like glancing down an endless, though diminishing,
corridor. On this Thursday morning I thought I saw a curious suggestion of motion down that
normally empty corridor—but, as I have said, soon dismissed the notion.
When I reached the dining-room I found everyone complaining of the cold, and
learned that the school’s heating-plant was temporarily out of order. Being especially
sensitive to low temperatures, I was myself an acute sufferer; and at once decided not to brave
any freezing schoolroom that day. Accordingly I invited my class to come over to my living-room
for an informal session around my grate-fire—a suggestion which the boys received enthusiastically.
After the session one of the boys, Robert Grandison, asked if he might remain;
since he had no appointment for the second morning period. I told him to stay, and welcome.
He sat down to study in front of the fireplace in a comfortable chair.
It was not long, however, before Robert moved to another chair somewhat farther
away from the freshly replenished blaze, this change bringing him directly opposite the old
mirror. From my own chair in another part of the room I noticed how fixedly he began to look
at the dim, cloudy glass, and, wondering what so greatly interested him, was reminded of my
own experience earlier that morning. As time passed he continued to gaze, a slight frown knitting
his brows.
At last I quietly asked him what had attracted his attention. Slowly, and still
wearing the puzzled frown, he looked over and replied rather cautiously:
“It’s the corrugations in the glass—or whatever they are, Mr.
Canevin. I was noticing how they all seem to run from a certain point. Look—I’ll show
you what I mean.”
The boy jumped up, went over to the mirror, and placed his finger on a point
near its lower left-hand corner.
“It’s right here, sir,” he explained, turning to look toward
me and keeping his finger on the chosen spot.
His muscular action in turning may have pressed his finger against the glass.
Suddenly he withdrew his hand as though with some slight effort, and with a faintly muttered
“Ouch.” Then he looked at the glass in obvious mystification.
“What happened?” I asked, rising and approaching.
“Why—it—” He seemed embarrassed. “It—I—felt—well,
as though it were pulling my finger into it. Seems—er—perfectly foolish, sir, but—well—it
was a most peculiar sensation.” Robert had an unusual vocabulary for his fifteen years.
I came over and had him show me the exact spot he meant.
“You’ll think I’m rather a fool, sir,” he said shamefacedly,
“but—well, from right here I can’t be absolutely sure. From the chair it seemed
to be clear enough.”
Now thoroughly interested, I sat down in the chair Robert had occupied and
looked at the spot he selected on the mirror. Instantly the thing “jumped out at me.”
Unmistakably, from that particular angle, all the many whorls in the ancient glass appeared
to converge like a large number of spread strings held in one hand and radiating out in streams.
Getting up and crossing to the mirror, I could no longer see the curious spot.
Only from certain angles, apparently, was it visible. Directly viewed, that portion of the mirror
did not even give back a normal reflection—for I could not see my face in it. Manifestly
I had a minor puzzle on my hands.
Presently the school gong sounded, and the fascinated Robert Grandison departed
hurriedly, leaving me alone with my odd little problem in optics. I raised several window-shades,
crossed the hallway, and sought for the spot in the chiffonier mirror’s reflection. Finding
it readily, I looked very intently and thought I again detected something of the “motion.”
I craned my neck, and at last, at a certain angle of vision, the thing again “jumped out
at me.”
The vague “motion” was now positive and definite—an appearance
of torsional movement, or of whirling; much like a minute yet intense whirlwind or waterspout,
or a huddle of autumn leaves dancing circularly in an eddy of wind along a level lawn. It was,
like the earth’s, a double motion—around and around, and at the same time inward,
as if the whorls poured themselves endlessly toward some point inside the glass. Fascinated,
yet realizing that the thing must be an illusion, I grasped an impression of quite distinct
suction, and thought of Robert’s embarrassed explanation: “I felt as though
it were pulling my finger into it.”
A kind of slight chill ran suddenly up and down my backbone. There was something
here distinctly worth looking into. And as the idea of investigation came to me, I recalled
the rather wistful expression of Robert Grandison when the gong called him to class. I remembered
how he had looked back over his shoulder as he walked obediently out into the hallway, and resolved
that he should be included in whatever analysis I might make of this little mystery.
Exciting events connected with that same Robert, however, were soon to chase
all thoughts of the mirror from my consciousness for a time. I was away all that afternoon,
and did not return to the school until the five-fifteen “Call-Over”—a general
assembly at which the boys’ attendance was compulsory. Dropping in at this function with
the idea of picking Robert up for a session with the mirror, I was astonished and pained to
find him absent—a very unusual and unaccountable thing in his case. That evening Browne
told me that the boy had actually disappeared, a search in his room, in the gymnasium, and in
all other accustomed places being unavailing, though all his belongings—including his outdoor
clothing—were in their proper places.
He had not been encountered on the ice or with any of the hiking groups that
afternoon, and telephone calls to all the school-catering merchants of the neighborhood were
in vain. There was, in short, no record of his having been seen since the end of the lesson
periods at two-fifteen; when he had turned up the stairs toward his room in Dormitory Number
Three.
When the disappearance was fully realized, the resulting sensation was tremendous
throughout the school. Browne, as headmaster, had to bear the brunt of it; and such an unprecedented
occurrence in his well-regulated, highly organized institution left him quite bewildered. It
was learned that Robert had not run away to his home in western Pennsylvania, nor did any of
the searching-parties of boys and masters find any trace of him in the snowy countryside around
the school. So far as could be seen, he had simply vanished.
Robert’s parents arrived on the afternoon of the second day after his
disappearance. They took their trouble quietly, though, of course, they were staggered by this
unexpected disaster. Browne looked ten years older for it, but there was absolutely nothing
that could be done. By the fourth day the case had settled down in the opinion of the school
as an insoluble mystery. Mr. and Mrs. Grandison went reluctantly back to their home, and on
the following morning the ten days’ Christmas vacation began.
Boys and masters departed in anything but the usual holiday spirit; and Browne
and his wife were left, along with the servants, as my only fellow-occupants of the big place.
Without the masters and boys it seemed a very hollow shell indeed.
That afternoon I sat in front of my grate-fire thinking about Robert’s
disappearance and evolving all sorts of fantastic theories to account for it. By evening I had
acquired a bad headache, and ate a light supper accordingly. Then, after a brisk walk around
the massed buildings, I returned to my living-room and took up the burden of thought once more.
A little after ten o’clock I awakened in my armchair, stiff and chilled,
from a doze during which I had let the fire go out. I was physically uncomfortable, yet mentally
aroused by a peculiar sensation of expectancy and possible hope. Of course it had to do with
the problem that was harassing me. For I had started from that inadvertent nap with a curious,
persistent idea—the odd idea that a tenuous, hardly recognizable Robert Grandison had been
trying desperately to communicate with me. I finally went to bed with one conviction unreasoningly
strong in my mind. Somehow I was sure that young Robert Grandison was still alive.
That I should be receptive of such a notion will not seem strange to those
who know my long residence in the West Indies and my close contact with unexplained happenings
there. It will not seem strange, either, that I fell asleep with an urgent desire to establish
some sort of mental communication with the missing boy. Even the most prosaic scientists affirm,
with Freud, Jung, and Adler, that the subconscious mind is most open to external impressions
in sleep; though such impressions are seldom carried over intact into the waking state.
Going a step further and granting the existence of telepathic forces, it follows
that such forces must act most strongly on a sleeper; so that if I were ever to get a definite
message from Robert, it would be during a period of profoundest slumber. Of course, I might
lose the message in waking; but my aptitude for retaining such things has been sharpened by
types of mental discipline picked up in various obscure corners of the globe.
I must have dropped asleep instantaneously, and from the vividness of my dreams
and the absence of wakeful intervals I judge that my sleep was a very deep one. It was six-forty-five
when I awakened, and there still lingered with me certain impressions which I knew were carried
over from the world of somnolent cerebration. Filling my mind was the vision of Robert Grandison
strangely transformed to a boy of a dull greenish dark-blue color; Robert desperately endeavoring
to communicate with me by means of speech, yet finding some almost insuperable difficulty in
so doing. A wall of curious spatial separation seemed to stand between him and me—a mysterious,
invisible wall which completely baffled us both.
I had seen Robert as though at some distance, yet queerly enough he seemed
at the same time to be just beside me. He was both larger and smaller than in real life, his
apparent size varying directly, instead of inversely, with the distance as he
advanced and retreated in the course of conversation. That is, he grew larger instead of smaller
to my eye when he stepped away or backwards, and vice versa; as if the laws of perspective in
his case had been wholly reversed. His aspect was misty and uncertain—as if he lacked sharp
or permanent outlines; and the anomalies of his coloring and clothing baffled me utterly at
first.
At some point in my dream Robert’s vocal efforts had finally crystallized
into audible speech—albeit speech of an abnormal thickness and dullness. I could not for
a time understand anything he said, and even in the dream racked my brain for a clue to where
he was, what he wanted to tell, and why his utterance was so clumsy and unintelligible. Then
little by little I began to distinguish words and phrases, the very first of which sufficed
to throw my dreaming self into the wildest excitement and to establish a certain mental connection
which had previously refused to take conscious form because of the utter incredibility of what
it implied.
I do not know how long I listened to those halting words amidst my deep slumber,
but hours must have passed while the strangely remote speaker struggled on with his tale. There
was revealed to me such a circumstance as I cannot hope to make others believe without the strongest
corroborative evidence, yet which I was quite ready to accept as truth—both in the dream
and after waking—because of my former contacts with uncanny things. The boy was obviously
watching my face—mobile in receptive sleep—as he choked along; for about the time I
began to comprehend him, his own expression brightened and gave signs of gratitude and hope.
Any attempt to hint at Robert’s message, as it lingered in my ears after
a sudden awakening in the cold, brings this narrative to a point where I must choose my words
with the greatest care. Everything involved is so difficult to record that one tends to flounder
helplessly. I have said that the revelation established in my mind a certain connection which
reason had not allowed me to formulate consciously before. This connection, I need no longer
hesitate to hint, had to do with the old Copenhagen mirror whose suggestions of motion had so
impressed me on the morning of the disappearance, and whose whorl-like contours and apparent
illusions of suction had later exerted such a disquieting fascination on both Robert and me.
Resolutely, though my outer consciousness had previously rejected what my intuition
would have liked to imply, it could reject that stupendous conception no longer. What was fantasy
in the tale of “Alice” now came to me as a grave and immediate reality. That looking-glass
had indeed possessed a malign, abnormal suction; and the struggling speaker in my dream made
clear the extent to which it violated all the known precedents of human experience and all the
age-old laws of our three sane dimensions. It was more than a mirror—it was a gate; a trap;
a link with spatial recesses not meant for the denizens of our visible universe, and realizable
only in terms of the most intricate non-Euclidean mathematics. And in some outrageous fashion
Robert Grandison had passed out of our ken into the glass and was there immured, waiting for
release.
It is significant that upon awakening I harbored no genuine doubt of the reality
of the revelation. That I had actually held conversation with a trans-dimensional Robert, rather
than evoked the whole episode from my broodings about his disappearance and about the old illusions
of the mirror, was as certain to my utmost instincts as any of the instinctive certainties commonly
recognized as valid.
The tale thus unfolded to me was of the most incredibly bizarre character.
As had been clear on the morning of his disappearance, Robert was intensely fascinated by the
ancient mirror. All through the hours of school, he had it in mind to come back to my living-room
and examine it further. When he did arrive, after the close of the school day, it was somewhat
later than two-twenty, and I was absent in town. Finding me out and knowing that I would not
mind, he had come into my living-room and gone straight to the mirror; standing before it and
studying the place where, as we had noted, the whorls appeared to converge.
Then, quite suddenly, there had come to him an overpowering urge to place his
hand upon this whorl-center. Almost reluctantly, against his better judgment, he had done so;
and upon making the contact had felt at once the strange, almost painful suction which had perplexed
him that morning. Immediately thereafter—quite without warning, but with a wrench which
seemed to twist and tear every bone and muscle in his body and to bulge and press and cut at
every nerve—he had been abruptly drawn through and found himself inside.
Once through, the excruciatingly painful stress upon his entire system was
suddenly released. He felt, he said, as though he had just been born—a feeling that made
itself evident every time he tried to do anything; walk, stoop, turn his head, or utter speech.
Everything about his body seemed a misfit.
These sensations wore off after a long while, Robert’s body becoming an
organized whole rather than a number of protesting parts. Of all the forms of expression, speech
remained the most difficult; doubtless because it is complicated, bringing into play a number
of different organs, muscles, and tendons. Robert’s feet, on the other hand, were the first
members to adjust themselves to the new conditions within the glass.
During the morning hours I rehearsed the whole reason-defying problem; correlating
everything I had seen and heard, dismissing the natural scepticism of a man of sense, and scheming
to devise possible plans for Robert’s release from his incredible prison. As I did so a
number of originally perplexing points became clear—or at least, clearer—to me.
There was, for example, the matter of Robert’s coloring. His face and
hands, as I have indicated, were a kind of dull greenish dark-blue; and I may add that his familiar
blue Norfolk jacket had turned to a pale lemon-yellow while his trousers remained a neutral
gray as before. Reflecting on this after waking, I found the circumstance closely allied to
the reversal of perspective which made Robert seem to grow larger when receding and smaller
when approaching. Here, too, was a physical reversal—for every detail of his coloring
in the unknown dimension was the exact reverse or complement of the corresponding color detail
in normal life. In physics the typical complementary colors are blue and yellow, and red and
green. These pairs are opposites, and when mixed yield gray. Robert’s natural color was
a pinkish-buff, the opposite of which is the greenish-blue I saw. His blue coat had become yellow,
while the gray trousers remained gray. This latter point baffled me until I remembered that
gray is itself a mixture of opposites. There is no opposite for gray—or rather, it is its
own opposite.
Another clarified point was that pertaining to Robert’s curiously dulled
and thickened speech—as well as to the general awkwardness and sense of misfit bodily parts
of which he complained. This, at the outset, was a puzzle indeed; though after long thought
the clue occurred to me. Here again was the same reversal which affected perspective
and coloration. Anyone in the fourth dimension must necessarily be reversed in just this way—hands
and feet, as well as colors and perspectives, being changed about. It would be the same with
all the other dual organs, such as nostrils, ears, and eyes. Thus Robert had been talking with
a reversed tongue, teeth, vocal cords, and kindred speech-apparatus; so that his difficulties
in utterance were little to be wondered at.
As the morning wore on, my sense of the stark reality and maddening urgency
of the dream-disclosed situation increased rather than decreased. More and more I felt that
something must be done, yet realized that I could not seek advice or aid. Such a story as mine—a
conviction based upon mere dreaming—could not conceivably bring me anything but ridicule
or suspicions as to my mental state. And what, indeed, could I do, aided or unaided, with as
little working data as my nocturnal impressions had provided? I must, I finally recognized,
have more information before I could even think of a possible plan for releasing Robert. This
could come only through the receptive conditions of sleep, and it heartened me to reflect that
according to every probability my telepathic contact would be resumed the moment I fell into
deep slumber again.
I accomplished sleeping that afternoon, after a midday dinner at which, through
rigid self-control, I succeeded in concealing from Browne and his wife the tumultuous thoughts
that crashed through my mind. Hardly had my eyes closed when a dim telepathic image began to
appear; and I soon realized to my infinite excitement that it was identical with what I had
seen before. If anything, it was more distinct; and when it began to speak I seemed able to
grasp a greater proportion of the words.
During this sleep I found most of the morning’s deductions confirmed,
though the interview was mysteriously cut off long prior to my awakening. Robert had seemed
apprehensive just before communication ceased, but had already told me that in his strange fourth-dimensional
prison colors and spatial relationships were indeed reversed—black being white, distance
increasing apparent size, and so on.
He had also intimated that, notwithstanding his possession of full physical
form and sensations, most human vital properties seemed curiously suspended. Nutriment, for
example, was quite unnecessary—a phenomenon really more singular than the omnipresent reversal
of objects and attributes, since the latter was a reasonable and mathematically indicated state
of things. Another significant piece of information was that the only exit from the glass to
the world was the entrance-way, and that this was permanently barred and impenetrably sealed,
so far as egress was concerned.
That night I had another visitation from Robert; nor did such impressions,
received at odd intervals while I slept receptively minded, cease during the entire period of
his incarceration. His efforts to communicate were desperate and often pitiful; for at times
the telepathic bond would weaken, while at other times fatigue, excitement, or fear of interruption
would hamper and thicken his speech.
I may as well narrate as a continuous whole all that Robert told me throughout
the whole series of transient mental contacts—perhaps supplementing it at certain points
with facts directly related after his release. The telepathic information was fragmentary and
often nearly inarticulate, but I studied it over and over during the waking intervals of three
intense days; classifying and cogitating with feverish diligence, since it was all that I had
to go upon if the boy were to be brought back into our world.
The fourth-dimensional region in which Robert found himself was not, as in
scientific romance, an unknown and infinite realm of strange sights and fantastic denizens;
but was rather a projection of certain limited parts of our own terrestrial sphere within an
alien and normally inaccessible aspect or direction of space. It was a curiously fragmentary,
intangible, and heterogeneous world—a series of apparently dissociated scenes merging indistinctly
one into the other; their constituent details having an obviously different status from that
of an object drawn into the ancient mirror as Robert had been drawn. These scenes were like
dream-vistas or magic-lantern images—elusive visual impressions of which the boy was not
really a part, but which formed a sort of panoramic background or ethereal environment against
which or amidst which he moved.
He could not touch any of the parts of these scenes—walls, trees, furniture,
and the like—but whether this was because they were truly non-material, or because they
always receded at his approach, he was singularly unable to determine. Everything seemed fluid,
mutable, and unreal. When he walked, it appeared to be on whatever lower surface the visible
scene might have—floor, path, greensward, or such; but upon analysis he always found that
the contact was an illusion. There was never any difference in the resisting force met by his
feet—and by his hands when he would stoop experimentally—no matter what changes of
apparent surface might be involved. He could not describe this foundation or limiting plane
on which he walked as anything more definite than a virtually abstract pressure balancing his
gravity. Of definite tactile distinctiveness it had none, and supplementing it there seemed
to be a kind of restricted levitational force which accomplished transfers of altitude. He could
never actually climb stairs, yet would gradually walk up from a lower level to a higher.
Passage from one definite scene to another involved a sort of gliding through
a region of shadow or blurred focus where the details of each scene mingled curiously. All the
vistas were distinguished by the absence of transient objects, and the indefinite or ambiguous
appearance of such semi-transient objects as furniture or details of vegetation. The lighting
of every scene was diffuse and perplexing, and of course the scheme of reversed colors—bright
red grass, yellow sky with confused black and gray cloud-forms, white tree-trunks, and green
brick walls—gave to everything an air of unbelievable grotesquerie. There was an alteration
of day and night, which turned out to be a reversal of the normal hours of light and darkness
at whatever point on the earth the mirror might be hanging.
This seemingly irrelevant diversity of the scenes puzzled Robert until he realized
that they comprised merely such places as had been reflected for long continuous periods in
the ancient glass. This also explained the odd absence of transient objects, the generally arbitrary
boundaries of vision, and the fact that all exteriors were framed by the outlines of doorways
or windows. The glass, it appeared, had power to store up these intangible scenes through long
exposure; though it could never absorb anything corporeally, as Robert had been absorbed, except
by a very different and particular process.
But—to me at least—the most incredible aspect of the mad phenomenon
was the monstrous subversion of our known laws of space involved in the relation of various
illusory scenes to the actual terrestrial regions represented. I have spoken of the glass as
storing up the images of these regions, but this is really an inexact definition. In truth,
each of the mirror scenes formed a true and quasi-permanent fourth-dimensional projection of
the corresponding mundane region; so that whenever Robert moved to a certain part of a certain
scene, as he moved into the image of my room when sending his telepathic messages, he was
actually in that place itself, on earth—though under spatial conditions which cut off
all sensory communication, in either direction, between him and the present tri-dimensional
aspect of the place.
Theoretically speaking, a prisoner in the glass could in a few moments go anywhere
on our planet—into any place, that is, which had ever been reflected in the mirror’s
surface. This probably applied even to places where the mirror had not hung long enough to produce
a clear illusory scene; the terrestrial region being then represented by a zone of more or less
formless shadow. Outside the definite scenes was a seemingly limitless waste of neutral gray
shadow about which Robert could never be certain, and into which he never dared stray far lest
he become hopelessly lost to the real and mirror worlds alike.
Among the earliest particulars which Robert gave, was the fact that he was
not alone in his confinement. Various others, all in antique garb, were in there with him—a
corpulent middle-aged gentleman with tied queue and velvet knee-breeches who spoke English fluently
though with a marked Scandinavian accent; a rather beautiful small girl with very blonde hair
which appeared a glossy dark blue; two apparently mute Negroes whose features contrasted grotesquely
with the pallor of their reversed-colored skins; three young men; one young woman; a very small
child, almost an infant; and a lean, elderly Dane of extremely distinctive aspect and a kind
of half-malign intellectuality of countenance.
This last-named individual—Axel Holm, who wore the satin small-clothes,
flared-skirted coat, and voluminous full-bottomed periwig of an age more than two centuries
in the past—was notable among the little band as being the one responsible for the presence
of them all. He it was who, skilled equally in the arts of magic and glass working, had long
ago fashioned this strange dimensional prison in which himself, his slaves, and those whom he
chose to invite or allure thither were immured unchangingly for as long as the mirror might
endure.
Holm was born early in the seventeenth century, and had followed with tremendous
competence and success the trade of a glass-blower and molder in Copenhagen. His glass, especially
in the form of large drawing-room mirrors, was always at a premium. But the same bold mind which
had made him the first glazier of Europe also served to carry his interests and ambitions far
beyond the sphere of mere material craftsmanship. He had studied the world around him, and chafed
at the limitations of human knowledge and capability. Eventually he sought for dark ways to
overcome those limitations, and gained more success than is good for any mortal.
He had aspired to enjoy something like eternity, the mirror being his provision
to secure this end. Serious study of the fourth dimension was far from beginning with Einstein
in our own era; and Holm, more than erudite in all the methods of his day, knew that a bodily
entrance into that hidden phase of space would prevent him from dying in the ordinary physical
sense. Research showed him that the principle of reflection undoubtedly forms the chief gate
to all dimensions beyond our familiar three; and chance placed in his hands a small and very
ancient glass whose cryptic properties he believed he could turn to advantage. Once “inside”
this mirror according to the method he had envisaged, he felt that “life” in the sense
of form and consciousness would go on virtually forever, provided the mirror could be preserved
indefinitely from breakage or deterioration.
Holm made a magnificent mirror, such as would be prized and carefully preserved;
and in it deftly fused the strange whorl-configured relic he had acquired. Having thus prepared
his refuge and his trap, he began to plan his mode of entrance and conditions of tenancy. He
would have with him both servitors and companions; and as an experimental beginning he sent
before him into the glass two dependable Negro slaves brought from the West Indies. What his
sensations must have been upon beholding this first concrete demonstration of his theories,
only imagination can conceive.
Undoubtedly a man of his knowledge realized that absence from the outside world,
if deferred beyond the natural span of life of those within, must mean instant dissolution at
the first attempt to return to that world. But, barring that misfortune or accidental breakage,
those within would remain forever as they were at the time of entrance. They would never grow
old, and would need neither food nor drink.
To make his prison tolerable he sent ahead of him certain books and writing
materials, a chair and table of stoutest workmanship, and a few other accessories. He knew that
the images which the glass would reflect or absorb would not be tangible, but would merely extend
around him like a background of dream. His own transition in 1687 was a momentous experience;
and must have been attended by mixed sensations of triumph and terror. Had anything gone wrong,
there were frightful possibilities of being lost in dark and inconceivable multiple dimensions.
For over fifty years he had been unable to secure any additions to the little
company of himself and slaves, but later on he had perfected his telepathic method of visualizing
small sections of the outside world close to the glass, and attracting certain individuals in
those areas through the mirror’s strange entrance. Thus Robert, influenced into a desire
to press upon the “door,” had been lured within. Such visualizations depended wholly
on telepathy, since no one inside the mirror could see out into the world of men.
It was, in truth, a strange life that Holm and his company had lived inside
the glass. Since the mirror had stood for fully a century with its face to the dusty stone wall
of the shed where I found it, Robert was the first being to enter this limbo after all that
interval. His arrival was a gala event, for he brought news of the outside world which must
have been of the most startling impressiveness to the more thoughtful of those within. He, in
his turn—young though he was—felt overwhelmingly the weirdness of meeting and talking
with persons who had been alive in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
The deadly monotony of life for the prisoners can only be vaguely conjectured.
As mentioned, its extensive spatial variety was limited to localities which had been reflected
in the mirror for long periods; and many of these had become dim and strange as tropical climates
had made inroads on the surface. Certain localities were bright and beautiful, and in these
the company usually gathered. But no scene could be fully satisfying; since the visible objects
were all unreal and intangible, and often of perplexingly indefinite outline. When the tedious
periods of darkness came, the general custom was to indulge in memories, reflections, or conversations.
Each one of that strange, pathetic group had retained his or her personality unchanged and unchangeable,
since becoming immune to the time effects of outside space.
The number of inanimate objects within the glass, aside from the clothing of
the prisoners, was very small; being largely limited to the accessories Holm had provided for
himself. The rest did without even furniture, since sleep and fatigue had vanished along with
most other vital attributes. Such inorganic things as were present, seemed as exempt from decay
as the living beings. The lower forms of animal life were wholly absent.
Robert derived most of his information from Herr Thiele, the gentleman who
spoke English with a Scandinavian accent. This portly Dane had taken a fancy to him, and talked
at considerable length. The others, too, had received him with courtesy and goodwill; Holm himself,
seeming well-disposed, had told him about various matters including the door of the trap.
The boy, as he told me later, was sensible enough never to attempt communication
with me when Holm was nearby. Twice, while thus engaged, he had seen Holm appear; and had accordingly
ceased at once. At no time could I see the world behind the mirror’s surface. Robert’s
visual image, which included his bodily form and the clothing connected with it, was—like
the aural image of his halting voice and like his own visualization of myself—a case of
purely telepathic transmission; and did not involve true interdimensional sight. However, had
Robert been as trained a telepathist as Holm, he might have transmitted a few strong images
apart from his immediate person.
Throughout this period of revelation I had, of course, been desperately trying
to devise a method for Robert’s release. On the fourth day—the ninth after the disappearance—I
hit on a solution. Everything considered, my laboriously formulated process was not a very complicated
one; though I could not tell beforehand how it would work, while the possibility of ruinous
consequences in case of a slip was appalling. This process depended, basically, on the fact
that there was no possible exit from inside the glass. If Holm and his prisoners were permanently
sealed in, then release must come wholly from outside. Other considerations included the disposal
of the other prisoners, if any survived, and especially of Axel Holm. What Robert had told me
of him was anything but reassuring; and I certainly did not wish him loose in my apartment,
free once more to work his evil will upon the world. The telepathic messages had not made fully
clear the effect of liberation on those who had entered the glass so long ago.
There was, too, a final though minor problem in case of success—that of
getting Robert back into the routine of school life without having to explain the incredible.
In case of failure, it was highly inadvisable to have witnesses present at the release operations—and
lacking these, I simply could not attempt to relate the actual facts if I should succeed. Even
to me the reality seemed a mad one whenever I let my mind turn from the data so compellingly
presented in that tense series of dreams.
When I had thought these problems through as far as possible, I procured a
large magnifying-glass from the school laboratory and studied minutely every square millimeter
of that whorl-center which presumably marked the extent of the original ancient mirror used
by Holm. Even with this aid I could not quite trace the exact boundary between the old area
and the surface added by the Danish wizard; but after a long study decided on a conjectural
oval boundary which I outlined very precisely with a soft blue pencil. I then made a trip to
Stamford, where I procured a heavy glass-cutting tool; for my primary idea was to remove the
ancient and magically potent mirror from its later setting.
My next step was to figure out the best time of day to make the crucial experiment.
I finally settled on two-thirty a.m.—both because it was a good season for uninterrupted
work, and because it was the “opposite” of two-thirty p.m., the probable moment at
which Robert had entered the mirror. This form of “oppositeness” may or may not have
been relevant, but I knew at least that the chosen hour was as good as any—and perhaps
better than most.
I finally set to work in the early morning of the eleventh day after the disappearance,
having drawn all the shades of my living-room and closed and locked the door into the hallway.
Following with breathless care the elliptical line I had traced, I worked around the whorl-section
with my steel-wheeled cutting tool. The ancient glass, half an inch thick, crackled crisply
under the firm, uniform pressure; and upon completing the circuit I cut around it a second time,
crunching the roller more deeply into the glass.
Then, very carefully indeed, I lifted the heavy mirror down from its console
and leaned it face-inward against the wall; prying off two of the thin, narrow boards nailed
to the back. With equal caution I smartly tapped the cut-around space with the heavy wooden
handle of the glass-cutter.
At the very first tap the whorl-containing section of glass dropped out on
the Bokhara rug beneath. I did not know what might happen, but was keyed up for anything, and
took a deep involuntary breath. I was on my knees for convenience at the moment, with my face
quite near the newly made aperture; and as I breathed there poured into my nostrils a powerful
dusty odor—a smell not comparable to any other I have ever encountered. Then everything
within my range of vision suddenly turned to a dull gray before my failing eyesight as I felt
myself overpowered by an invisible force which robbed my muscles of their power to function.
I remember grasping weakly and futilely at the edge of the nearest window drapery
and feeling it rip loose from its fastening. Then I sank slowly to the floor as the darkness
of oblivion passed over me.
When I regained consciousness I was lying on the Bokhara rug with my legs held
unaccountably up in the air. The room was full of that hideous and inexplicable dusty smell—and
as my eyes began to take in definite images I saw that Robert Grandison stood in front of me.
It was he—fully in the flesh and with his coloring normal—who was holding my legs
aloft to bring the blood back to my head as the school’s first-aid course had taught him
to do with persons who had fainted. For a moment I was struck mute by the stifling odor and
by a bewilderment which quickly merged into a sense of triumph. Then I found myself able to
move and speak collectedly.
I raised a tentative hand and waved feebly at Robert.
“All right, old man,” I murmured, “you can let my legs down
now. Many thanks. I’m all right again, I think. It was the smell—I imagine—that
got me. Open that farthest window, please—wide—from the bottom. That’s it—thanks.
No—leave the shade down the way it was.”
I struggled to my feet, my disturbed circulation adjusting itself in waves,
and stood upright hanging to the back of a big chair. I was still “groggy,” but a
blast of fresh, bitterly cold air from the window revived me rapidly. I sat down in the big
chair and looked at Robert, now walking toward me.
“First,” I said hurriedly, “tell me, Robert—those others—Holm?
What happened to them, when I—opened the exit?”
Robert paused half-way across the room and looked at me very gravely.
“I saw them fade away—into nothingness—Mr. Canevin,” he
said with solemnity; “and with them—everything. There isn’t any more ‘inside,’
sir—thank God, and you, sir!”
And young Robert, at last yielding to the sustained strain which he had borne
through all those terrible eleven days, suddenly broke down like a little child and began to
weep hysterically in great, stifling, dry sobs.
I picked him up and placed him gently on my davenport, threw a rug over him,
sat down by his side, and put a calming hand on his forehead.
“Take it easy, old fellow,” I said soothingly.
The boy’s sudden and very natural hysteria passed as quickly as it had
come on as I talked to him reassuringly about my plans for his quiet restoration to the school.
The interest of the situation and the need of concealing the incredible truth beneath a rational
explanation took hold of his imagination as I had expected; and at last he sat up eagerly, telling
the details of his release and listening to the instructions I had thought out. He had, it seems,
been in the “projected area” of my bedroom when I opened the way back, and had emerged
in that actual room—hardly realizing that he was “out.” Upon hearing a fall in
the living-room he had hastened thither, finding me on the rug in my fainting spell.
I need mention only briefly my method of restoring Robert in a seemingly normal
way—how I smuggled him out of the window in an old hat and sweater of mine, took him down
the road in my quietly started car, coached him carefully in a tale I had devised, and returned
to arouse Browne with the news of his discovery. He had, I explained, been walking alone on
the afternoon of his disappearance; and had been offered a motor ride by two young men who,
as a joke and over his protests that he could go no farther than Stamford and back, had begun
to carry him past that town. Jumping from the car during a traffic stop with the intention of
hitch-hiking back before Call-Over, he had been hit by another car just as the traffic was released—awakening
ten days later in the Greenwich home of the people who had hit him. On learning the date, I
added, he had immediately telephoned the school; and I, being the only one awake, had answered
the call and hurried after him in my car without stopping to notify anyone.
Browne, who at once telephoned to Robert’s parents, accepted my story
without question; and forbore to interrogate the boy because of the latter’s manifest exhaustion.
It was arranged that he should remain at the school for a rest, under the expert care of Mrs.
Browne, a former trained nurse. I naturally saw a good deal of him during the remainder of the
Christmas vacation, and was thus enabled to fill in certain gaps in his fragmentary dream-story.
Now and then we would almost doubt the actuality of what had occurred; wondering
whether we had not both shared some monstrous delusion born of the mirror’s glittering
hypnotism, and whether the tale of the ride and accident were not after all the real truth.
But whenever we did so we would be brought back to belief by some monstrous and haunting memory;
with me, of Robert’s dream-figure and its thick voice and inverted colors; with him, of
the whole fantastic pageantry of ancient people and dead scenes that he had witnessed. And then
there was that joint recollection of that damnable dusty odor. . . . We knew
what it meant: the instant dissolution of those who had entered an alien dimension a century
and more ago.
There are, in addition, at least two lines of rather more positive evidence;
one of which comes through my researches in Danish annals concerning the sorcerer, Axel Holm.
Such a person, indeed, left many traces in folklore and written records; and diligent library
sessions, plus conferences with various learned Danes, have shed much more light on his evil
fame. At present I need say only that the Copenhagen glass-blower—born in 1612—was
a notorious Luciferian whose pursuits and final vanishing formed a matter of awed debate over
two centuries ago. He had burned with a desire to know all things and to conquer every limitation
of mankind—to which end he had delved deeply into occult and forbidden fields ever since
he was a child.
He was commonly held to have joined a coven of the dreaded witch-cult, and
the vast lore of ancient Scandinavian myth—with its Loki the Sly One and the accursed Fenris-Wolf—was
soon an open book to him. He had strange interests and objectives, few of which were definitely
known, but some of which were recognized as intolerably evil. It is recorded that his two Negro
helpers, originally slaves from the Danish West Indies, had become mute soon after their acquisition
by him; and that they had disappeared not long before his own disappearance from the ken of
mankind.
Near the close of an already long life the idea of a glass of immortality appears
to have entered his mind. That he had acquired an enchanted mirror of inconceivable antiquity
was a matter of common whispering; it being alleged that he had purloined it from a fellow-sorcerer
who had entrusted it to him for polishing.
This mirror—according to popular tales a trophy as potent in its way as
the better-known Aegis of Minerva or Hammer of Thor—was a small oval object called “Loki’s
Glass,” made of some polished fusible mineral and having magical properties which included
the divination of the immediate future and the power to show the possessor his enemies. That
it had deeper potential properties, realizable in the hands of an erudite magician, none of
the common people doubted; and even educated persons attached much fearful importance to Holm’s
rumored attempts to incorporate it in a larger glass of immortality. Then had come the wizard’s
disappearance in 1687, and the final sale and dispersal of his goods amidst a growing cloud
of fantastic legendry. It was, altogether, just such a story as one would laugh at if possessed
of no particular key; yet to me, remembering those dream messages and having Robert Grandison’s
corroboration before me, it formed a positive confirmation of all the bewildering marvels that
had been unfolded.
But as I have said, there is still another line of rather positive evidence—of
a very different character—at my disposal. Two days after his release, as Robert, greatly
improved in strength and appearance, was placing a log on my living-room fire, I noticed a certain
awkwardness in his motions and was struck by a persistent idea. Summoning him to my desk I suddenly
asked him to pick up an ink-stand—and was scarcely surprised to note that, despite lifelong
right-handedness, he obeyed unconsciously with his left hand. Without alarming him, I then asked
that he unbutton his coat and let me listen to his cardiac action. What I found upon placing
my ear to his chest—and what I did not tell him for some time afterward—was that 
his heart was beating on his right side.
He had gone into the glass right-handed and with all organs in their normal
positions. Now he was left-handed and with organs reversed, and would doubtless continue so
for the rest of his life. Clearly, the dimensional transition had been no illusion—for
this physical change was tangible and unmistakable. Had there been a natural exit from the glass,
Robert would probably have undergone a thorough re-reversal and emerged in perfect normality—as
indeed the color-scheme of his body and clothing did emerge. The forcible nature of his release,
however, undoubtedly set something awry; so that dimensions no longer had a chance to right
themselves as chromatic wave-frequencies still did.
I had not merely opened Holm’s trap; I had destroyed it;
and at the particular stage of destruction marked by Robert’s escape some of the reversing
properties had perished. It is significant that in escaping Robert had felt no pain comparable
to that experienced in entering. Had the destruction been still more sudden, I shiver to think
of the monstrosities of color the boy would always have been forced to bear. I may add that
after discovering Robert’s reversal I examined the rumpled and discarded clothing he had
worn in the glass, and found, as I had expected, a complete reversal of pockets, buttons, and
all other corresponding details.
At this moment Loki’s Glass, just as it fell on my Bokhara rug from the
now patched and harmless mirror, weighs down a sheaf of papers on my writing-table here in St.
Thomas, venerable capital of the Danish West Indies—now the American Virgin Islands. Various
collectors of old Sandwich glass have mistaken it for an odd bit of that early American product—but
I privately realize that my paper-weight is an antique of far subtler and more paleogean craftsmanship.
Still, I do not disillusion such enthusiasts.


The Unnamable


We were sitting on a dilapidated seventeenth-century tomb in the late afternoon of an autumn
day at the old burying-ground in Arkham, and speculating about the unnamable. Looking toward
the giant willow in the centre of the cemetery, whose trunk has nearly engulfed an ancient,
illegible slab, I had made a fantastic remark about the spectral and unmentionable nourishment
which the colossal roots must be sucking in from that hoary, charnel earth; when my friend chided
me for such nonsense and told me that since no interments had occurred there for over a century,
nothing could possibly exist to nourish the tree in other than an ordinary manner. Besides,
he added, my constant talk about “unnamable” and “unmentionable” things
was a very puerile device, quite in keeping with my lowly standing as an author. I was too fond
of ending my stories with sights or sounds which paralysed my heroes’ faculties and left
them without courage, words, or associations to tell what they had experienced. We know things,
he said, only through our five senses or our religious intuitions; wherefore it is quite impossible
to refer to any object or spectacle which cannot be clearly depicted by the solid definitions
of fact or the correct doctrines of theology—preferably those of the Congregationalists,
with whatever modifications tradition and Sir Arthur Conan Doyle may supply.
With this friend, Joel Manton, I had often languidly disputed. He was principal
of the East High School, born and bred in Boston and sharing New England’s self-satisfied
deafness to the delicate overtones of life. It was his view that only our normal, objective
experiences possess any aesthetic significance, and that it is the province of the artist not
so much to rouse strong emotion by action, ecstasy, and astonishment, as to maintain a placid
interest and appreciation by accurate, detailed transcripts of every-day affairs. Especially
did he object to my preoccupation with the mystical and the unexplained; for although believing
in the supernatural much more fully than I, he would not admit that it is sufficiently commonplace
for literary treatment. That a mind can find its greatest pleasure in escapes from the daily
treadmill, and in original and dramatic recombinations of images usually thrown by habit and
fatigue into the hackneyed patterns of actual existence, was something virtually incredible
to his clear, practical, and logical intellect. With him all things and feelings had fixed dimensions,
properties, causes, and effects; and although he vaguely knew that the mind sometimes holds
visions and sensations of far less geometrical, classifiable, and workable nature, he believed
himself justified in drawing an arbitrary line and ruling out of court all that cannot be experienced
and understood by the average citizen. Besides, he was almost sure that nothing can be really
“unnamable”. It didn’t sound sensible to him.
Though I well realised the futility of imaginative and metaphysical arguments
against the complacency of an orthodox sun-dweller, something in the scene of this afternoon
colloquy moved me to more than usual contentiousness. The crumbling slate slabs, the patriarchal
trees, and the centuried gambrel roofs of the witch-haunted old town that stretched around,
all combined to rouse my spirit in defence of my work; and I was soon carrying my thrusts into
the enemy’s own country. It was not, indeed, difficult to begin a counter-attack, for
I knew that Joel Manton actually half clung to many old-wives’ superstitions which sophisticated
people had long outgrown; beliefs in the appearance of dying persons at distant places, and
in the impressions left by old faces on the windows through which they had gazed all their lives.
To credit these whisperings of rural grandmothers, I now insisted, argued a faith in the existence
of spectral substances on the earth apart from and subsequent to their material counterparts.
It argued a capability of believing in phenomena beyond all normal notions; for if a dead man
can transmit his visible or tangible image half across the world, or down the stretch of the
centuries, how can it be absurd to suppose that deserted houses are full of queer sentient things,
or that old graveyards teem with the terrible, unbodied intelligence of generations? And since
spirit, in order to cause all the manifestations attributed to it, cannot be limited by any
of the laws of matter; why is it extravagant to imagine psychically living dead things in shapes—or
absences of shapes—which must for human spectators be utterly and appallingly “unnamable”?
“Common sense” in reflecting on these subjects, I assured my friend with some warmth,
is merely a stupid absence of imagination and mental flexibility.
Twilight had now approached, but neither of us felt any wish to cease speaking.
Manton seemed unimpressed by my arguments, and eager to refute them, having that confidence
in his own opinions which had doubtless caused his success as a teacher; whilst I was too sure
of my ground to fear defeat. The dusk fell, and lights faintly gleamed in some of the distant
windows, but we did not move. Our seat on the tomb was very comfortable, and I knew that my
prosaic friend would not mind the cavernous rift in the ancient, root-disturbed brickwork close
behind us, or the utter blackness of the spot brought by the intervention of a tottering, deserted
seventeenth-century house between us and the nearest lighted road. There in the dark, upon that
riven tomb by the deserted house, we talked on about the “unnamable”, and after
my friend had finished his scoffing I told him of the awful evidence behind the story at which
he had scoffed the most.
My tale had been called “The Attic Window”, and appeared in the
January, 1922, issue of Whispers. In a good many places, especially the South and the
Pacific coast, they took the magazines off the stands at the complaints of silly milksops; but
New England didn’t get the thrill and merely shrugged its shoulders at my extravagance.
The thing, it was averred, was biologically impossible to start with; merely another of those
crazy country mutterings which Cotton Mather had been gullible enough to dump into his chaotic
Magnalia Christi Americana, and so poorly authenticated that even he had not ventured
to name the locality where the horror occurred. And as to the way I amplified the bare jotting
of the old mystic—that was quite impossible, and characteristic of a flighty and notional
scribbler! Mather had indeed told of the thing as being born, but nobody but a cheap sensationalist
would think of having it grow up, look into people’s windows at night, and be hidden in
the attic of a house, in flesh and in spirit, till someone saw it at the window centuries later
and couldn’t describe what it was that turned his hair grey. All this was flagrant trashiness,
and my friend Manton was not slow to insist on that fact. Then I told him what I had found in
an old diary kept between 1706 and 1723, unearthed among family papers not a mile from where
we were sitting; that, and the certain reality of the scars on my ancestor’s chest and
back which the diary described. I told him, too, of the fears of others in that region, and
how they were whispered down for generations; and how no mythical madness came to the boy who
in 1793 entered an abandoned house to examine certain traces suspected to be there.
It had been an eldritch thing—no wonder sensitive students shudder at
the Puritan age in Massachusetts. So little is known of what went on beneath the surface—so
little, yet such a ghastly festering as it bubbles up putrescently in occasional ghoulish glimpses.
The witchcraft terror is a horrible ray of light on what was stewing in men’s crushed
brains, but even that is a trifle. There was no beauty; no freedom—we can see that from
the architectural and household remains, and the poisonous sermons of the cramped divines. And
inside that rusted iron strait-jacket lurked gibbering hideousness, perversion, and diabolism.
Here, truly, was the apotheosis of the unnamable.
Cotton Mather, in that daemoniac sixth book which no one should read after
dark, minced no words as he flung forth his anathema. Stern as a Jewish prophet, and laconically
unamazed as none since his day could be, he told of the beast that had brought forth what was
more than beast but less than man—the thing with the blemished eye—and of the screaming
drunken wretch that they hanged for having such an eye. This much he baldly told, yet without
a hint of what came after. Perhaps he did not know, or perhaps he knew and did not dare to tell.
Others knew, but did not dare to tell—there is no public hint of why they whispered about
the lock on the door to the attic stairs in the house of a childless, broken, embittered old
man who had put up a blank slate slab by an avoided grave, although one may trace enough evasive
legends to curdle the thinnest blood.
It is all in that ancestral diary I found; all the hushed innuendoes and furtive
tales of things with a blemished eye seen at windows in the night or in deserted meadows near
the woods. Something had caught my ancestor on a dark valley road, leaving him with marks of
horns on his chest and of ape-like claws on his back; and when they looked for prints in the
trampled dust they found the mixed marks of split hooves and vaguely anthropoid paws. Once a
post-rider said he saw an old man chasing and calling to a frightful loping, nameless thing
on Meadow Hill in the thinly moonlit hours before dawn, and many believed him. Certainly, there
was strange talk one night in 1710 when the childless, broken old man was buried in the crypt
behind his own house in sight of the blank slate slab. They never unlocked that attic door,
but left the whole house as it was, dreaded and deserted. When noises came from it, they whispered
and shivered; and hoped that the lock on that attic door was strong. Then they stopped hoping
when the horror occurred at the parsonage, leaving not a soul alive or in one piece. With the
years the legends take on a spectral character—I suppose the thing, if it was a living
thing, must have died. The memory had lingered hideously—all the more hideous because
it was so secret.
During this narration my friend Manton had become very silent, and I saw that
my words had impressed him. He did not laugh as I paused, but asked quite seriously about the
boy who went mad in 1793, and who had presumably been the hero of my fiction. I told him why
the boy had gone to that shunned, deserted house, and remarked that he ought to be interested,
since he believed that windows retained latent images of those who had sat at them. The boy
had gone to look at the windows of that horrible attic, because of tales of things seen behind
them, and had come back screaming maniacally.
Manton remained thoughtful as I said this, but gradually reverted to his analytical
mood. He granted for the sake of argument that some unnatural monster had really existed, but
reminded me that even the most morbid perversion of Nature need not be unnamable or scientifically
indescribable. I admired his clearness and persistence, and added some further revelations I
had collected among the old people. Those later spectral legends, I made plain, related to monstrous
apparitions more frightful than anything organic could be; apparitions of gigantic bestial forms
sometimes visible and sometimes only tangible, which floated about on moonless nights and haunted
the old house, the crypt behind it, and the grave where a sapling had sprouted beside an illegible
slab. Whether or not such apparitions had ever gored or smothered people to death, as told in
uncorroborated traditions, they had produced a strong and consistent impression; and were yet
darkly feared by very aged natives, though largely forgotten by the last two generations—perhaps
dying for lack of being thought about. Moreover, so far as aesthetic theory was involved, if
the psychic emanations of human creatures be grotesque distortions, what coherent representation
could express or portray so gibbous and infamous a nebulosity as the spectre of a malign, chaotic
perversion, itself a morbid blasphemy against Nature? Moulded by the dead brain of a hybrid
nightmare, would not such a vaporous terror constitute in all loathsome truth the exquisitely,
the shriekingly unnamable?
The hour must now have grown very late. A singularly noiseless bat brushed
by me, and I believe it touched Manton also, for although I could not see him I felt him raise
his arm. Presently he spoke.
“But is that house with the attic window still standing and deserted?”
“Yes,” I answered. “I have seen it.”
“And did you find anything there—in the attic or anywhere else?”
“There were some bones up under the eaves. They may have been what that
boy saw—if he was sensitive he wouldn’t have needed anything in the window-glass
to unhinge him. If they all came from the same object it must have been an hysterical, delirious
monstrosity. It would have been blasphemous to leave such bones in the world, so I went back
with a sack and took them to the tomb behind the house. There was an opening where I could dump
them in. Don’t think I was a fool—you ought to have seen that skull. It had four-inch
horns, but a face and jaw something like yours and mine.”
At last I could feel a real shiver run through Manton, who had moved very near.
But his curiosity was undeterred.
“And what about the window-panes?”
“They were all gone. One window had lost its entire frame, and in the
other there was not a trace of glass in the little diamond apertures. They were that kind—the
old lattice windows that went out of use before 1700. I don’t believe they’ve had
any glass for an hundred years or more—maybe the boy broke ’em if he got that far;
the legend doesn’t say.”
Manton was reflecting again.
“I’d like to see that house, Carter. Where is it? Glass or no glass,
I must explore it a little. And the tomb where you put those bones, and the other grave without
an inscription—the whole thing must be a bit terrible.”
“You did see it—until it got dark.”
My friend was more wrought upon than I had suspected, for at this touch of
harmless theatricalism he started neurotically away from me and actually cried out with a sort
of gulping gasp which released a strain of previous repression. It was an odd cry, and all the
more terrible because it was answered. For as it was still echoing, I heard a creaking sound
through the pitchy blackness, and knew that a lattice window was opening in that accursed old
house beside us. And because all the other frames were long since fallen, I knew that it was
the grisly glassless frame of that daemoniac attic window.
Then came a noxious rush of noisome, frigid air from that same dreaded direction,
followed by a piercing shriek just beside me on that shocking rifted tomb of man and monster.
In another instant I was knocked from my gruesome bench by the devilish threshing of some unseen
entity of titanic size but undetermined nature; knocked sprawling on the root-clutched mould
of that abhorrent graveyard, while from the tomb came such a stifled uproar of gasping and whirring
that my fancy peopled the rayless gloom with Miltonic legions of the misshapen damned. There
was a vortex of withering, ice-cold wind, and then the rattle of loose bricks and plaster; but
I had mercifully fainted before I could learn what it meant.
Manton, though smaller than I, is more resilient; for we opened our eyes at
almost the same instant, despite his greater injuries. Our couches were side by side, and we
knew in a few seconds that we were in St. Mary’s Hospital. Attendants were grouped about
in tense curiosity, eager to aid our memory by telling us how we came there, and we soon heard
of the farmer who had found us at noon in a lonely field beyond Meadow Hill, a mile from the
old burying-ground, on a spot where an ancient slaughterhouse is reputed to have stood. Manton
had two malignant wounds in the chest, and some less severe cuts or gougings in the back. I
was not so seriously hurt, but was covered with welts and contusions of the most bewildering
character, including the print of a split hoof. It was plain that Manton knew more than I, but
he told nothing to the puzzled and interested physicians till he had learned what our injuries
were. Then he said we were the victims of a vicious bull—though the animal was a difficult
thing to place and account for.
After the doctors and nurses had left, I whispered an awestruck question:
“Good God, Manton, but what was it? Those scars—was it
like that?”
And I was too dazed to exult when he whispered back a thing I had half expected—
“No—it wasn’t that way at all. It was everywhere—a
gelatin—a slime—yet it had shapes, a thousand shapes of horror beyond all memory.
There were eyes—and a blemish. It was the pit—the maelstrom—the ultimate abomination.
Carter, it was the unnamable!”


The Whisperer in Darkness

I.

Bear in mind closely that I did not see any actual visual horror at the end. To say that a mental
shock was the cause of what I inferred—that last straw which sent me racing out of the
lonely Akeley farmhouse and through the wild domed hills of Vermont in a commandeered motor
at night—is to ignore the plainest facts of my final experience. Notwithstanding the deep
extent to which I shared the information and speculations of Henry Akeley, the things I saw
and heard, and the admitted vividness of the impression produced on me by these things, I cannot
prove even now whether I was right or wrong in my hideous inference. For after all, Akeley’s
disappearance establishes nothing. People found nothing amiss in his house despite the bullet-marks
on the outside and inside. It was just as though he had walked out casually for a ramble in
the hills and failed to return. There was not even a sign that a guest had been there, or that
those horrible cylinders and machines had been stored in the study. That he had mortally feared
the crowded green hills and endless trickle of brooks among which he had been born and reared,
means nothing at all, either; for thousands are subject to just such morbid fears. Eccentricity,
moreover, could easily account for his strange acts and apprehensions toward the last.
The whole matter began, so far as I am concerned, with the historic and unprecedented
Vermont floods of November 3, 1927. I was then, as now, an instructor of literature at Miskatonic
University in Arkham, Massachusetts, and an enthusiastic amateur student of New England folklore.
Shortly after the flood, amidst the varied reports of hardship, suffering, and organised relief
which filled the press, there appeared certain odd stories of things found floating in some
of the swollen rivers; so that many of my friends embarked on curious discussions and appealed
to me to shed what light I could on the subject. I felt flattered at having my folklore study
taken so seriously, and did what I could to belittle the wild, vague tales which seemed so clearly
an outgrowth of old rustic superstitions. It amused me to find several persons of education
who insisted that some stratum of obscure, distorted fact might underlie the rumours.
The tales thus brought to my notice came mostly through newspaper cuttings;
though one yarn had an oral source and was repeated to a friend of mine in a letter from his
mother in Hardwick, Vermont. The type of thing described was essentially the same in all cases,
though there seemed to be three separate instances involved—one connected with the Winooski
River near Montpelier, another attached to the West River in Windham County beyond Newfane,
and a third centring in the Passumpsic in Caledonia County above Lyndonville. Of course many
of the stray items mentioned other instances, but on analysis they all seemed to boil down to
these three. In each case country folk reported seeing one or more very bizarre and disturbing
objects in the surging waters that poured down from the unfrequented hills, and there was a
widespread tendency to connect these sights with a primitive, half-forgotten cycle of whispered
legend which old people resurrected for the occasion.
What people thought they saw were organic shapes not quite like any they had
ever seen before. Naturally, there were many human bodies washed along by the streams in that
tragic period; but those who described these strange shapes felt quite sure that they were not
human, despite some superficial resemblances in size and general outline. Nor, said the witnesses,
could they have been any kind of animal known to Vermont. They were pinkish things about five
feet long; with crustaceous bodies bearing vast pairs of dorsal fins or membraneous wings and
several sets of articulated limbs, and with a sort of convoluted ellipsoid, covered with multitudes
of very short antennae, where a head would ordinarily be. It was really remarkable how closely
the reports from different sources tended to coincide; though the wonder was lessened by the
fact that the old legends, shared at one time throughout the hill country, furnished a morbidly
vivid picture which might well have coloured the imaginations of all the witnesses concerned.
It was my conclusion that such witnesses—in every case naive and simple backwoods folk—had
glimpsed the battered and bloated bodies of human beings or farm animals in the whirling currents;
and had allowed the half-remembered folklore to invest these pitiful objects with fantastic
attributes.
The ancient folklore, while cloudy, evasive, and largely forgotten by the present
generation, was of a highly singular character, and obviously reflected the influence of still
earlier Indian tales. I knew it well, though I had never been in Vermont, through the exceedingly
rare monograph of Eli Davenport, which embraces material orally obtained prior to 1839 among
the oldest people of the state. This material, moreover, closely coincided with tales which
I had personally heard from elderly rustics in the mountains of New Hampshire. Briefly summarised,
it hinted at a hidden race of monstrous beings which lurked somewhere among the remoter hills—in
the deep woods of the highest peaks, and the dark valleys where streams trickle from unknown
sources. These beings were seldom glimpsed, but evidences of their presence were reported by
those who had ventured farther than usual up the slopes of certain mountains or into certain
deep, steep-sided gorges that even the wolves shunned.
There were queer footprints or claw-prints in the mud of brook-margins and
barren patches, and curious circles of stones, with the grass around them worn away, which did
not seem to have been placed or entirely shaped by Nature. There were, too, certain caves of
problematical depth in the sides of the hills; with mouths closed by boulders in a manner scarcely
accidental, and with more than an average quota of the queer prints leading both toward and
away from them—if indeed the direction of these prints could be justly estimated. And
worst of all, there were the things which adventurous people had seen very rarely in the twilight
of the remotest valleys and the dense perpendicular woods above the limits of normal hill-climbing.
It would have been less uncomfortable if the stray accounts of these things
had not agreed so well. As it was, nearly all the rumours had several points in common; averring
that the creatures were a sort of huge, light-red crab with many pairs of legs and with two
great bat-like wings in the middle of the back. They sometimes walked on all their legs, and
sometimes on the hindmost pair only, using the others to convey large objects of indeterminate
nature. On one occasion they were spied in considerable numbers, a detachment of them wading
along a shallow woodland watercourse three abreast in evidently disciplined formation. Once
a specimen was seen flying—launching itself from the top of a bald, lonely hill at night
and vanishing in the sky after its great flapping wings had been silhouetted an instant against
the full moon.
These things seemed content, on the whole, to let mankind alone; though they
were at times held responsible for the disappearance of venturesome individuals—especially
persons who built houses too close to certain valleys or too high up on certain mountains. Many
localities came to be known as inadvisable to settle in, the feeling persisting long after the
cause was forgotten. People would look up at some of the neighbouring mountain-precipices with
a shudder, even when not recalling how many settlers had been lost, and how many farmhouses
burnt to ashes, on the lower slopes of those grim, green sentinels.
But while according to the earliest legends the creatures would appear to have
harmed only those trespassing on their privacy; there were later accounts of their curiosity
respecting men, and of their attempts to establish secret outposts in the human world. There
were tales of the queer claw-prints seen around farmhouse windows in the morning, and of occasional
disappearances in regions outside the obviously haunted areas. Tales, besides, of buzzing voices
in imitation of human speech which made surprising offers to lone travellers on roads and cart-paths
in the deep woods, and of children frightened out of their wits by things seen or heard where
the primal forest pressed close upon their dooryards. In the final layer of legends—the
layer just preceding the decline of superstition and the abandonment of close contact with the
dreaded places—there are shocked references to hermits and remote farmers who at some
period of life appeared to have undergone a repellent mental change, and who were shunned and
whispered about as mortals who had sold themselves to the strange beings. In one of the northeastern
counties it seemed to be a fashion about 1800 to accuse eccentric and unpopular recluses of
being allies or representatives of the abhorred things.
As to what the things were—explanations naturally varied. The common
name applied to them was “those ones”, or “the old ones”, though other
terms had a local and transient use. Perhaps the bulk of the Puritan settlers set them down
bluntly as familiars of the devil, and made them a basis of awed theological speculation. Those
with Celtic legendry in their heritage—mainly the Scotch-Irish element of New Hampshire,
and their kindred who had settled in Vermont on Governor Wentworth’s colonial grants—linked
them vaguely with the malign fairies and “little people” of the bogs and raths,
and protected themselves with scraps of incantation handed down through many generations. But
the Indians had the most fantastic theories of all. While different tribal legends differed,
there was a marked consensus of belief in certain vital particulars; it being unanimously agreed
that the creatures were not native to this earth.
The Pennacook myths, which were the most consistent and picturesque, taught
that the Winged Ones came from the Great Bear in the sky, and had mines in our earthly hills
whence they took a kind of stone they could not get on any other world. They did not live here,
said the myths, but merely maintained outposts and flew back with vast cargoes of stone to their
own stars in the north. They harmed only those earth-people who got too near them or spied upon
them. Animals shunned them through instinctive hatred, not because of being hunted. They could
not eat the things and animals of earth, but brought their own food from the stars. It was bad
to get near them, and sometimes young hunters who went into their hills never came back. It
was not good, either, to listen to what they whispered at night in the forest with voices like
a bee’s that tried to be like the voices of men. They knew the speech of all kinds of
men—Pennacooks, Hurons, men of the Five Nations—but did not seem to have or need
any speech of their own. They talked with their heads, which changed colour in different ways
to mean different things.
All the legendry, of course, white and Indian alike, died down during the nineteenth
century, except for occasional atavistical flareups. The ways of the Vermonters became settled;
and once their habitual paths and dwellings were established according to a certain fixed plan,
they remembered less and less what fears and avoidances had determined that plan, and even that
there had been any fears or avoidances. Most people simply knew that certain hilly regions were
considered as highly unhealthy, unprofitable, and generally unlucky to live in, and that the
farther one kept from them the better off one usually was. In time the ruts of custom and economic
interest became so deeply cut in approved places that there was no longer any reason for going
outside them, and the haunted hills were left deserted by accident rather than by design. Save
during infrequent local scares, only wonder-loving grandmothers and retrospective nonagenarians
ever whispered of beings dwelling in those hills; and even such whisperers admitted that there
was not much to fear from those things now that they were used to the presence of houses and
settlements, and now that human beings let their chosen territory severely alone.
All this I had known from my reading, and from certain folk-tales picked up
in New Hampshire; hence when the flood-time rumours began to appear, I could easily guess what
imaginative background had evolved them. I took great pains to explain this to my friends, and
was correspondingly amused when several contentious souls continued to insist on a possible
element of truth in the reports. Such persons tried to point out that the early legends had
a significant persistence and uniformity, and that the virtually unexplored nature of the Vermont
hills made it unwise to be dogmatic about what might or might not dwell among them; nor could
they be silenced by my assurance that all the myths were of a well-known pattern common to most
of mankind and determined by early phases of imaginative experience which always produced the
same type of delusion.
It was of no use to demonstrate to such opponents that the Vermont myths differed
but little in essence from those universal legends of natural personification which filled the
ancient world with fauns and dryads and satyrs, suggested the kallikanzari of modern
Greece, and gave to wild Wales and Ireland their dark hints of strange, small, and terrible
hidden races of troglodytes and burrowers. No use, either, to point out the even more startlingly
similar belief of the Nepalese hill tribes in the dreaded Mi-Go or “Abominable
Snow-Men” who lurk hideously amidst the ice and rock pinnacles of the Himalayan summits.
When I brought up this evidence, my opponents turned it against me by claiming that it must
imply some actual historicity for the ancient tales; that it must argue the real existence of
some queer elder earth-race, driven to hiding after the advent and dominance of mankind, which
might very conceivably have survived in reduced numbers to relatively recent times—or
even to the present.
The more I laughed at such theories, the more these stubborn friends asseverated
them; adding that even without the heritage of legend the recent reports were too clear, consistent,
detailed, and sanely prosaic in manner of telling, to be completely ignored. Two or three fanatical
extremists went so far as to hint at possible meanings in the ancient Indian tales which gave
the hidden beings a non-terrestrial origin; citing the extravagant books of Charles Fort with
their claims that voyagers from other worlds and outer space have often visited earth. Most
of my foes, however, were merely romanticists who insisted on trying to transfer to real life
the fantastic lore of lurking “little people” made popular by the magnificent horror-fiction
of Arthur Machen.
II.
As was only natural under the circumstances, this piquant debating finally
got into print in the form of letters to the Arkham Advertiser; some of which were copied
in the press of those Vermont regions whence the flood-stories came. The Rutland Herald
gave half a page of extracts from the letters on both sides, while the Brattleboro Reformer
reprinted one of my long historical and mythological summaries in full, with some accompanying
comments in “The Pendrifter’s” thoughtful column which supported and applauded
my sceptical conclusions. By the spring of 1928 I was almost a well-known figure in Vermont,
notwithstanding the fact that I had never set foot in the state. Then came the challenging letters
from Henry Akeley which impressed me so profoundly, and which took me for the first and last
time to that fascinating realm of crowded green precipices and muttering forest streams.
Most of what I now know of Henry Wentworth Akeley was gathered by correspondence
with his neighbours, and with his only son in California, after my experience in his lonely
farmhouse. He was, I discovered, the last representative on his home soil of a long, locally
distinguished line of jurists, administrators, and gentlemen-agriculturists. In him, however,
the family mentally had veered away from practical affairs to pure scholarship; so that he had
been a notable student of mathematics, astronomy, biology, anthropology, and folklore at the
University of Vermont. I had never previously heard of him, and he did not give many autobiographical
details in his communications; but from the first I saw he was a man of character, education,
and intelligence, albeit a recluse with very little worldly sophistication.
Despite the incredible nature of what he claimed, I could not help at once
taking Akeley more seriously than I had taken any of the other challengers of my views. For
one thing, he was really close to the actual phenomena—visible and tangible—that
he speculated so grotesquely about; and for another thing, he was amazingly willing to leave
his conclusions in a tentative state like a true man of science. He had no personal preferences
to advance, and was always guided by what he took to be solid evidence. Of course I began by
considering him mistaken, but gave him credit for being intelligently mistaken; and at no time
did I emulate some of his friends in attributing his ideas, and his fear of the lonely green
hills, to insanity. I could see that there was a great deal to the man, and knew that what he
reported must surely come from strange circumstances deserving investigation, however little
it might have to do with the fantastic causes he assigned. Later on I received from him certain
material proofs which placed the matter on a somewhat different and bewilderingly bizarre basis.
I cannot do better than transcribe in full, so far as is possible, the long
letter in which Akeley introduced himself, and which formed such an important landmark in my
own intellectual history. It is no longer in my possession, but my memory holds almost every
word of its portentous message; and again I affirm my confidence in the sanity of the man who
wrote it. Here is the text—a text which reached me in the cramped, archaic-looking scrawl
of one who had obviously not mingled much with the world during his sedate, scholarly life.





R.F.D. #2,
            Townshend, Windham Co.,
            Vermont.
            May 5, 1928.





Albert N. Wilmarth, Esq.,
118 Saltonstall St.,
Arkham, Mass.,

My dear Sir:—

I have read with great interest the Brattleboro Reformer’s reprint (Apr. 23, ’28)
of your letter on the recent stories of strange bodies seen floating in our flooded streams
last fall, and on the curious folklore they so well agree with. It is easy to see why an outlander
would take the position you take, and even why “Pendrifter” agrees with you. That
is the attitude generally taken by educated persons both in and out of Vermont, and was my own
attitude as a young man (I am now 57) before my studies, both general and in Davenport’s
book, led me to do some exploring in parts of the hills hereabouts not usually visited.
I was directed toward such studies by the queer old tales I used to hear from
elderly farmers of the more ignorant sort, but now I wish I had let the whole matter alone.
I might say, with all proper modesty, that the subject of anthropology and folklore is by no
means strange to me. I took a good deal of it at college, and am familiar with most of the standard
authorities such as Tylor, Lubbock, Frazer, Quatrefages, Murray, Osborn, Keith, Boule, G. Elliot
Smith, and so on. It is no news to me that tales of hidden races are as old as all mankind.
I have seen the reprints of letters from you, and those arguing with you, in the Rutland
Herald, and guess I know about where your controversy stands at the present time.
What I desire to say now is, that I am afraid your adversaries are nearer right
than yourself, even though all reason seems to be on your side. They are nearer right than they
realise themselves—for of course they go only by theory, and cannot know what I know.
If I knew as little of the matter as they, I would not feel justified in believing as they do.
I would be wholly on your side.
You can see that I am having a hard time getting to the point, probably because
I really dread getting to the point; but the upshot of the matter is that I have certain
evidence that monstrous things do indeed live in the woods on the high hills which nobody visits.
I have not seen any of the things floating in the rivers, as reported, but I have seen things
like them under circumstances I dread to repeat. I have seen footprints, and of late have
seen them nearer my own home (I live in the old Akeley place south of Townshend Village, on
the side of Dark Mountain) than I dare tell you now. And I have overheard voices in the woods
at certain points that I will not even begin to describe on paper.
At one place I heard them so much that I took a phonograph there—with
a dictaphone attachment and wax blank—and I shall try to arrange to have you hear the
record I got. I have run it on the machine for some of the old people up here, and one of the
voices had nearly scared them paralysed by reason of its likeness to a certain voice (that buzzing
voice in the woods which Davenport mentions) that their grandmothers have told about and mimicked
for them. I know what most people think of a man who tells about “hearing voices”—but
before you draw conclusions just listen to this record and ask some of the older backwoods people
what they think of it. If you can account for it normally, very well; but there must be something
behind it. Ex nihilo nihil fit, you know.
Now my object in writing you is not to start an argument, but to give you information
which I think a man of your tastes will find deeply interesting. This is private. Publicly
I am on your side, for certain things shew me that it does not do for people to know too
much about these matters. My own studies are now wholly private, and I would not think of saying
anything to attract people’s attention and cause them to visit the places I have explored.
It is true—terribly true—that there are non-human creatures watching us all the
time; with spies among us gathering information. It is from a wretched man who, if he was
sane (as I think he was), was one of those spies, that I got a large part of my clues
to the matter. He later killed himself, but I have reason to think there are others now.
The things come from another planet, being able to live in interstellar
space and fly through it on clumsy, powerful wings which have a way of resisting the ether
but which are too poor at steering to be of much use in helping them about on earth. I will
tell you about this later if you do not dismiss me at once as a madman. They come here to get
metals from mines that go deep under the hills, and I think I know where they come from.
They will not hurt us if we let them alone, but no one can say what will happen if we get too
curious about them. Of course a good army of men could wipe out their mining colony. That is
what they are afraid of. But if that happened, more would come from outside—any
number of them. They could easily conquer the earth, but have not tried so far because they
have not needed to. They would rather leave things as they are to save bother.
I think they mean to get rid of me because of what I have discovered. There
is a great black stone with unknown hieroglyphics half worn away which I found in the woods
on Round Hill, east of here; and after I took it home everything became different. If they think
I suspect too much they will either kill me or take me off the earth to where they come from.
They like to take away men of learning once in a while, to keep informed on the state of things
in the human world.
This leads me to my secondary purpose in addressing you—namely, to urge
you to hush up the present debate rather than give it more publicity. People must be kept
away from these hills, and in order to effect this, their curiosity ought not to be aroused
any further. Heaven knows there is peril enough anyway, with promoters and real estate men flooding
Vermont with herds of summer people to overrun the wild places and cover the hills with cheap
bungalows.
I shall welcome further communication with you, and shall try to send you that
phonograph record and black stone (which is so worn that photographs don’t shew much)
by express if you are willing. I say “try” because I think those creatures have
a way of tampering with things around here. There is a sullen, furtive fellow named Brown, on
a farm near the village, who I think is their spy. Little by little they are trying to cut me
off from our world because I know too much about their world.
They have the most amazing way of finding out what I do. You may not even get
this letter. I think I shall have to leave this part of the country and go to live with my son
in San Diego, Cal., if things get any worse, but it is not easy to give up the place you were
born in, and where your family has lived for six generations. Also, I would hardly dare sell
this house to anybody now that the creatures have taken notice of it. They seem to be
trying to get the black stone back and destroy the phonograph record, but I shall not let them
if I can help it. My great police dogs always hold them back, for there are very few here as
yet, and they are clumsy in getting about. As I have said, their wings are not much use for
short flights on earth. I am on the very brink of deciphering that stone—in a very terrible
way—and with your knowledge of folklore you may be able to supply missing links enough
to help me. I suppose you know all about the fearful myths antedating the coming of man to the
earth—the Yog-Sothoth and Cthulhu cycles—which are hinted at in the Necronomicon.
I had access to a copy of that once, and hear that you have one in your college library under
lock and key.
To conclude, Mr. Wilmarth, I think that with our respective studies we can
be very useful to each other. I don’t wish to put you in any peril, and suppose I ought
to warn you that possession of the stone and the record won’t be very safe; but I think
you will find any risks worth running for the sake of knowledge. I will drive down to Newfane
or Brattleboro to send whatever you authorise me to send, for the express offices there are
more to be trusted. I might say that I live quite alone now, since I can’t keep hired
help any more. They won’t stay because of the things that try to get near the house at
night, and that keep the dogs barking continually. I am glad I didn’t get as deep as this
into the business while my wife was alive, for it would have driven her mad.
Hoping that I am not bothering you unduly, and that you will decide to get
in touch with me rather than throw this letter into the waste basket as a madman’s raving,
I am

Yrs. very truly,
HENRY W. AKELEY

P.S. I am making some extra prints of certain photographs taken by me, which I think will help
to prove a number of the points I have touched on. The old people think they are monstrously
true. I shall send you these very soon if you are interested. H.W.A.
It would be difficult to describe my sentiments upon reading this strange document
for the first time. By all ordinary rules, I ought to have laughed more loudly at these extravagances
than at the far milder theories which had previously moved me to mirth; yet something in the
tone of the letter made me take it with paradoxical seriousness. Not that I believed for a moment
in the hidden race from the stars which my correspondent spoke of; but that, after some grave
preliminary doubts, I grew to feel oddly sure of his sanity and sincerity, and of his confrontation
by some genuine though singular and abnormal phenomenon which he could not explain except in
this imaginative way. It could not be as he thought it, I reflected, yet on the other hand it
could not be otherwise than worthy of investigation. The man seemed unduly excited and alarmed
about something, but it was hard to think that all cause was lacking. He was so specific and
logical in certain ways—and after all, his yarn did fit in so perplexingly well with some
of the old myths—even the wildest Indian legends.
That he had really overheard disturbing voices in the hills, and had really
found the black stone he spoke about, was wholly possible despite the crazy inferences he had
made—inferences probably suggested by the man who had claimed to be a spy of the outer
beings and had later killed himself. It was easy to deduce that this man must have been wholly
insane, but that he probably had a streak of perverse outward logic which made the naive Akeley—already
prepared for such things by his folklore studies—believe his tale. As for the latest developments—it
appeared from his inability to keep hired help that Akeley’s humbler rustic neighbours
were as convinced as he that his house was besieged by uncanny things at night. The dogs really
barked, too.
And then the matter of that phonograph record, which I could not but believe
he had obtained in the way he said. It must mean something; whether animal noises deceptively
like human speech, or the speech of some hidden, night-haunting human being decayed to a state
not much above that of lower animals. From this my thoughts went back to the black hieroglyphed
stone, and to speculations upon what it might mean. Then, too, what of the photographs which
Akeley said he was about to send, and which the old people had found so convincingly terrible?
As I re-read the cramped handwriting I felt as never before that my credulous
opponents might have more on their side than I had conceded. After all, there might be some
queer and perhaps hereditarily misshapen outcasts in those shunned hills, even though no such
race of star-born monsters as folklore claimed. And if there were, then the presence of strange
bodies in the flooded streams would not be wholly beyond belief. Was it too presumptuous to
suppose that both the old legends and the recent reports had this much of reality behind them?
But even as I harboured these doubts I felt ashamed that so fantastic a piece of bizarrerie
as Henry Akeley’s wild letter had brought them up.
In the end I answered Akeley’s letter, adopting a tone of friendly interest
and soliciting further particulars. His reply came almost by return mail; and contained, true
to promise, a number of kodak views of scenes and objects illustrating what he had to tell.
Glancing at these pictures as I took them from the envelope, I felt a curious sense of fright
and nearness to forbidden things; for in spite of the vagueness of most of them, they had a
damnably suggestive power which was intensified by the fact of their being genuine photographs—actual
optical links with what they portrayed, and the product of an impersonal transmitting process
without prejudice, fallibility, or mendacity.
The more I looked at them, the more I saw that my serious estimate of Akeley
and his story had not been unjustified. Certainly, these pictures carried conclusive evidence
of something in the Vermont hills which was at least vastly outside the radius of our common
knowledge and belief. The worst thing of all was the footprint—a view taken where the
sun shone on a mud patch somewhere in a deserted upland. This was no cheaply counterfeited thing,
I could see at a glance; for the sharply defined pebbles and grass-blades in the field of vision
gave a clear index of scale and left no possibility of a tricky double exposure. I have called
the thing a “footprint”, but “claw-print” would be a better term. Even
now I can scarcely describe it save to say that it was hideously crab-like, and that there seemed
to be some ambiguity about its direction. It was not a very deep or fresh print, but seemed
to be about the size of an average man’s foot. From a central pad, pairs of saw-toothed
nippers projected in opposite directions—quite baffling as to function, if indeed the
whole object were exclusively an organ of locomotion.
Another photograph—evidently a time-exposure taken in deep shadow—was
of the mouth of a woodland cave, with a boulder of rounded regularity choking the aperture.
On the bare ground in front of it one could just discern a dense network of curious tracks,
and when I studied the picture with a magnifier I felt uneasily sure that the tracks were like
the one in the other view. A third picture shewed a druid-like circle of standing stones on
the summit of a wild hill. Around the cryptic circle the grass was very much beaten down and
worn away, though I could not detect any footprints even with the glass. The extreme remoteness
of the place was apparent from the veritable sea of tenantless mountains which formed the background
and stretched away toward a misty horizon.
But if the most disturbing of all the views was that of the footprint, the
most curiously suggestive was that of the great black stone found in the Round Hill woods. Akeley
had photographed it on what was evidently his study table, for I could see rows of books and
a bust of Milton in the background. The thing, as nearly as one might guess, had faced the camera
vertically with a somewhat irregularly curved surface of one by two feet; but to say anything
definite about that surface, or about the general shape of the whole mass, almost defies the
power of language. What outlandish geometrical principles had guided its cutting—for artificially
cut it surely was—I could not even begin to guess; and never before had I seen anything
which struck me as so strangely and unmistakably alien to this world. Of the hieroglyphics on
the surface I could discern very few, but one or two that I did see gave me rather a shock.
Of course they might be fraudulent, for others besides myself had read the monstrous and abhorred
Necronomicon of the mad Arab Abdul Alhazred; but it nevertheless made me shiver to recognise
certain ideographs which study had taught me to link with the most blood-curdling and blasphemous
whispers of things that had had a kind of mad half-existence before the earth and the other
inner worlds of the solar system were made.
Of the five remaining pictures, three were of swamp and hill scenes which seemed
to bear traces of hidden and unwholesome tenancy. Another was of a queer mark in the ground
very near Akeley’s house, which he said he had photographed the morning after a night
on which the dogs had barked more violently than usual. It was very blurred, and one could really
draw no certain conclusions from it; but it did seem fiendishly like that other mark or claw-print
photographed on the deserted upland. The final picture was of the Akeley place itself; a trim
white house of two stories and attic, about a century and a quarter old, and with a well-kept
lawn and stone-bordered path leading up to a tastefully carved Georgian doorway. There were
several huge police dogs on the lawn, squatting near a pleasant-faced man with a close-cropped
grey beard whom I took to be Akeley himself—his own photographer, one might infer from
the tube-connected bulb in his right hand.
From the pictures I turned to the bulky, closely written letter itself; and
for the next three hours was immersed in a gulf of unutterable horror. Where Akeley had given
only outlines before, he now entered into minute details; presenting long transcripts of words
overheard in the woods at night, long accounts of monstrous pinkish forms spied in thickets
at twilight on the hills, and a terrible cosmic narrative derived from the application of profound
and varied scholarship to the endless bygone discourses of the mad self-styled spy who had killed
himself. I found myself faced by names and terms that I had heard elsewhere in the most hideous
of connexions—Yuggoth, Great Cthulhu, Tsathoggua, Yog-Sothoth, R’lyeh, Nyarlathotep,
Azathoth, Hastur, Yian, Leng, the Lake of Hali, Bethmoora, the Yellow Sign, L’mur-Kathulos,
Bran, and the Magnum Innominandum—and was drawn back through nameless aeons and inconceivable
dimensions to worlds of elder, outer entity at which the crazed author of the Necronomicon
had only guessed in the vaguest way. I was told of the pits of primal life, and of the streams
that had trickled down therefrom; and finally, of the tiny rivulet from one of those streams
which had become entangled with the destinies of our own earth.
My brain whirled; and where before I had attempted to explain things away,
I now began to believe in the most abnormal and incredible wonders. The array of vital evidence
was damnably vast and overwhelming; and the cool, scientific attitude of Akeley—an attitude
removed as far as imaginable from the demented, the fanatical, the hysterical, or even the extravagantly
speculative—had a tremendous effect on my thought and judgment. By the time I laid the
frightful letter aside I could understand the fears he had come to entertain, and was ready
to do anything in my power to keep people away from those wild, haunted hills. Even now, when
time has dulled the impression and made me half question my own experience and horrible doubts,
there are things in that letter of Akeley’s which I would not quote, or even form into
words on paper. I am almost glad that the letter and record and photographs are gone now—and
I wish, for reasons I shall soon make clear, that the new planet beyond Neptune had not been
discovered.
With the reading of that letter my public debating about the Vermont horror
permanently ended. Arguments from opponents remained unanswered or put off with promises, and
eventually the controversy petered out into oblivion. During late May and June I was in constant
correspondence with Akeley; though once in a while a letter would be lost, so that we would
have to retrace our ground and perform considerable laborious copying. What we were trying to
do, as a whole, was to compare notes in matters of obscure mythological scholarship and arrive
at a clearer correlation of the Vermont horrors with the general body of primitive world legend.
For one thing, we virtually decided that these morbidities and the hellish
Himalayan Mi-Go were one and the same order of incarnated nightmare. There were also
absorbing zoölogical conjectures, which I would have referred to Professor Dexter in my
own college but for Akeley’s imperative command to tell no one of the matter before us.
If I seem to disobey that command now, it is only because I think that at this stage a warning
about those farther Vermont hills—and about those Himalayan peaks which bold explorers
are more and more determined to ascend—is more conducive to public safety than silence
would be. One specific thing we were leading up to was a deciphering of the hieroglyphics on
that infamous black stone—a deciphering which might well place us in possession of secrets
deeper and more dizzying than any formerly known to man.
III.
Toward the end of June the phonograph record came—shipped from Brattleboro,
since Akeley was unwilling to trust conditions on the branch line north of there. He had begun
to feel an increased sense of espionage, aggravated by the loss of some of our letters; and
said much about the insidious deeds of certain men whom he considered tools and agents of the
hidden beings. Most of all he suspected the surly farmer Walter Brown, who lived alone on a
run-down hillside place near the deep woods, and who was often seen loafing around corners in
Brattleboro, Bellows Falls, Newfane, and South Londonderry in the most inexplicable and seemingly
unmotivated way. Brown’s voice, he felt convinced, was one of those he had overheard on
a certain occasion in a very terrible conversation; and he had once found a footprint or claw-print
near Brown’s house which might possess the most ominous significance. It had been curiously
near some of Brown’s own footprints—footprints that faced toward it.
So the record was shipped from Brattleboro, whither Akeley drove in his Ford
car along the lonely Vermont back roads. He confessed in an accompanying note that he was beginning
to be afraid of those roads, and that he would not even go into Townshend for supplies now except
in broad daylight. It did not pay, he repeated again and again, to know too much unless one
were very remote from those silent and problematical hills. He would be going to California
pretty soon to live with his son, though it was hard to leave a place where all one’s
memories and ancestral feelings centred.
Before trying the record on the commercial machine which I borrowed from the
college administration building I carefully went over all the explanatory matter in Akeley’s
various letters. This record, he had said, was obtained about 1 a.m. on the first of May, 1915,
near the closed mouth of a cave where the wooded west slope of Dark Mountain rises out of Lee’s
Swamp. The place had always been unusually plagued with strange voices, this being the reason
he had brought the phonograph, dictaphone, and blank in expectation of results. Former experience
had told him that May-Eve—the hideous Sabbat-night of underground European legend—would
probably be more fruitful than any other date, and he was not disappointed. It was noteworthy,
though, that he never again heard voices at that particular spot.
Unlike most of the overheard forest voices, the substance of the record was
quasi-ritualistic, and included one palpably human voice which Akeley had never been able to
place. It was not Brown’s, but seemed to be that of a man of greater cultivation. The
second voice, however, was the real crux of the thing—for this was the accursed buzzing
which had no likeness to humanity despite the human words which it uttered in good English grammar
and a scholarly accent.
The recording phonograph and dictaphone had not worked uniformly well, and
had of course been at a great disadvantage because of the remote and muffled nature of the overheard
ritual; so that the actual speech secured was very fragmentary. Akeley had given me a transcript
of what he believed the spoken words to be, and I glanced through this again as I prepared the
machine for action. The text was darkly mysterious rather than openly horrible, though a knowledge
of its origin and manner of gathering gave it all the associative horror which any words could
well possess. I will present it here in full as I remember it—and I am fairly confident
that I know it correctly by heart, not only from reading the transcript, but from playing the
record itself over and over again. It is not a thing which one might readily forget!


(INDISTINGUISHABLE SOUNDS)

(A CULTIVATED MALE HUMAN VOICE)

. . . is the Lord of the Woods, even to . . .
and the gifts of the men of Leng . . . so from the wells of night to the gulfs
of space, and from the gulfs of space to the wells of night, ever the praises of Great Cthulhu,
of Tsathoggua, and of Him Who is not to be Named. Ever Their praises, and abundance to the Black
Goat of the Woods. Iä! Shub-Niggurath! The Goat with a Thousand Young!

(A BUZZING IMITATION OF HUMAN SPEECH)

Iä! Shub-Niggurath! The Black Goat of the Woods with a Thousand Young!

(HUMAN VOICE)

And it has come to pass that the Lord of the Woods, being . . .
seven and nine, down the onyx steps . . . (tri)butes to Him in the Gulf, Azathoth,
He of Whom Thou hast taught us marv(els) . . . on the wings of night out beyond space,
out beyond th . . . to That whereof Yuggoth is the youngest child, rolling alone
in black aether at the rim. . . .

(BUZZING VOICE)

. . . go out among men and find the ways thereof, that He in
the Gulf may know. To Nyarlathotep, Mighty Messenger, must all things be told. And He shall
put on the semblance of men, the waxen mask and the robe that hides, and come down from the
world of Seven Suns to mock. . . .

(HUMAN VOICE)

. . . (Nyarl)athotep, Great Messenger, bringer of strange joy to Yuggoth through the
void, Father of the Million Favoured Ones, Stalker among. . . .

(SPEECH CUT OFF BY END OF RECORD)


The White Ship


I am Basil Elton, keeper of the North Point light that my father and grandfather kept before
me. Far from the shore stands the grey lighthouse, above sunken slimy rocks that are seen when
the tide is low, but unseen when the tide is high. Past that beacon for a century have swept
the majestic barques of the seven seas. In the days of my grandfather there were many; in the
days of my father not so many; and now there are so few that I sometimes feel strangely alone,
as though I were the last man on our planet.
From far shores came those white-sailed argosies of old; from far Eastern shores
where warm suns shine and sweet odours linger about strange gardens and gay temples. The old
captains of the sea came often to my grandfather and told him of these things, which in turn
he told to my father, and my father told to me in the long autumn evenings when the wind howled
eerily from the East. And I have read more of these things, and of many things besides, in the
books men gave me when I was young and filled with wonder.
But more wonderful than the lore of old men and the lore of books is the secret
lore of ocean. Blue, green, grey, white, or black; smooth, ruffled, or mountainous; that ocean
is not silent. All my days have I watched it and listened to it, and I know it well. At first
it told to me only the plain little tales of calm beaches and near ports, but with the years
it grew more friendly and spoke of other things; of things more strange and more distant in
space and in time. Sometimes at twilight the grey vapours of the horizon have parted to grant
me glimpses of the ways beyond; and sometimes at night the deep waters of the sea have grown
clear and phosphorescent, to grant me glimpses of the ways beneath. And these glimpses have
been as often of the ways that were and the ways that might be, as of the ways that are; for
ocean is more ancient than the mountains, and freighted with the memories and the dreams of
Time.
Out of the South it was that the White Ship used to come when the moon was
full and high in the heavens. Out of the South it would glide very smoothly and silently over
the sea. And whether the sea was rough or calm, and whether the wind was friendly or adverse,
it would always glide smoothly and silently, its sails distant and its long strange tiers of
oars moving rhythmically. One night I espied upon the deck a man, bearded and robed, and he
seemed to beckon me to embark for fair unknown shores. Many times afterward I saw him under
the full moon, and ever did he beckon me.
Very brightly did the moon shine on the night I answered the call, and I walked
out over the waters to the White Ship on a bridge of moonbeams. The man who had beckoned now
spoke a welcome to me in a soft language I seemed to know well, and the hours were filled with
soft songs of the oarsmen as we glided away into a mysterious South, golden with the glow of
that full, mellow moon.
And when the day dawned, rosy and effulgent, I beheld the green shore of far
lands, bright and beautiful, and to me unknown. Up from the sea rose lordly terraces of verdure,
tree-studded, and shewing here and there the gleaming white roofs and colonnades of strange
temples. As we drew nearer the green shore the bearded man told me of that land, the Land of
Zar, where dwell all the dreams and thoughts of beauty that come to men once and then are forgotten.
And when I looked upon the terraces again I saw that what he said was true, for among the sights
before me were many things I had once seen through the mists beyond the horizon and in the phosphorescent
depths of ocean. There too were forms and fantasies more splendid than any I had ever known;
the visions of young poets who died in want before the world could learn of what they had seen
and dreamed. But we did not set foot upon the sloping meadows of Zar, for it is told that he
who treads them may nevermore return to his native shore.
As the White Ship sailed silently away from the templed terraces of Zar, we
beheld on the distant horizon ahead the spires of a mighty city; and the bearded man said to
me: “This is Thalarion, the City of a Thousand Wonders, wherein reside all those mysteries
that man has striven in vain to fathom.” And I looked again, at closer range, and saw
that the city was greater than any city I had known or dreamed of before. Into the sky the spires
of its temples reached, so that no man might behold their peaks; and far back beyond the horizon
stretched the grim, grey walls, over which one might spy only a few roofs, weird and ominous,
yet adorned with rich friezes and alluring sculptures. I yearned mightily to enter this fascinating
yet repellent city, and besought the bearded man to land me at the stone pier by the huge carven
gate Akariel; but he gently denied my wish, saying: “Into Thalarion, the City of a Thousand
Wonders, many have passed but none returned. Therein walk only daemons and mad things that are
no longer men, and the streets are white with the unburied bones of those who have looked upon
the eidolon Lathi, that reigns over the city.” So the White Ship sailed on past the walls
of Thalarion, and followed for many days a southward-flying bird, whose glossy plumage matched
the sky out of which it had appeared.
Then came we to a pleasant coast gay with blossoms of every hue, where as far
inland as we could see basked lovely groves and radiant arbours beneath a meridian sun. From
bowers beyond our view came bursts of song and snatches of lyric harmony, interspersed with
faint laughter so delicious that I urged the rowers onward in my eagerness to reach the scene.
And the bearded man spoke no word, but watched me as we approached the lily-lined shore. Suddenly
a wind blowing from over the flowery meadows and leafy woods brought a scent at which I trembled.
The wind grew stronger, and the air was filled with the lethal, charnel odour of plague-stricken
towns and uncovered cemeteries. And as we sailed madly away from that damnable coast the bearded
man spoke at last, saying: “This is Xura, the Land of Pleasures Unattained.”
So once more the White Ship followed the bird of heaven, over warm blessed
seas fanned by caressing, aromatic breezes. Day after day and night after night did we sail,
and when the moon was full we would listen to soft songs of the oarsmen, sweet as on that distant
night when we sailed away from my far native land. And it was by moonlight that we anchored
at last in the harbour of Sona-Nyl, which is guarded by twin headlands of crystal that rise
from the sea and meet in a resplendent arch. This is the Land of Fancy, and we walked to the
verdant shore upon a golden bridge of moonbeams.
In the Land of Sona-Nyl there is neither time nor space, neither suffering
nor death; and there I dwelt for many aeons. Green are the groves and pastures, bright and fragrant
the flowers, blue and musical the streams, clear and cool the fountains, and stately and gorgeous
the temples, castles, and cities of Sona-Nyl. Of that land there is no bound, for beyond each
vista of beauty rises another more beautiful. Over the countryside and amidst the splendour
of cities rove at will the happy folk, of whom all are gifted with unmarred grace and unalloyed
happiness. For the aeons that I dwelt there I wandered blissfully through gardens where quaint
pagodas peep from pleasing clumps of bushes, and where the white walks are bordered with delicate
blossoms. I climbed gentle hills from whose summits I could see entrancing panoramas of loveliness,
with steepled towns nestling in verdant valleys, and with the golden domes of gigantic cities
glittering on the infinitely distant horizon. And I viewed by moonlight the sparkling sea, the
crystal headlands, and the placid harbour wherein lay anchored the White Ship.
It was against the full moon one night in the immemorial year of Tharp that
I saw outlined the beckoning form of the celestial bird, and felt the first stirrings of unrest.
Then I spoke with the bearded man, and told him of my new yearnings to depart for remote Cathuria,
which no man hath seen, but which all believe to lie beyond the basalt pillars of the West.
It is the Land of Hope, and in it shine the perfect ideals of all that we know elsewhere; or
at least so men relate. But the bearded man said to me: “Beware of those perilous seas
wherein men say Cathuria lies. In Sona-Nyl there is no pain nor death, but who can tell what
lies beyond the basalt pillars of the West?” Natheless at the next full moon I boarded
the White Ship, and with the reluctant bearded man left the happy harbour for untravelled seas.
And the bird of heaven flew before, and led us toward the basalt pillars of
the West, but this time the oarsmen sang no soft songs under the full moon. In my mind I would
often picture the unknown Land of Cathuria with its splendid groves and palaces, and would wonder
what new delights there awaited me. “Cathuria,” I would say to myself, “is
the abode of gods and the land of unnumbered cities of gold. Its forests are of aloe and sandalwood,
even as the fragrant groves of Camorin, and among the trees flutter gay birds sweet with song.
On the green and flowery mountains of Cathuria stand temples of pink marble, rich with carven
and painted glories, and having in their courtyards cool fountains of silver, where purl with
ravishing music the scented waters that come from the grotto-born river Narg. And the cities
of Cathuria are cinctured with golden walls, and their pavements also are of gold. In the gardens
of these cities are strange orchids, and perfumed lakes whose beds are of coral and amber. At
night the streets and the gardens are lit with gay lanthorns fashioned from the three-coloured
shell of the tortoise, and here resound the soft notes of the singer and the lutanist. And the
houses of the cities of Cathuria are all palaces, each built over a fragrant canal bearing the
waters of the sacred Narg. Of marble and porphyry are the houses, and roofed with glittering
gold that reflects the rays of the sun and enhances the splendour of the cities as blissful
gods view them from the distant peaks. Fairest of all is the palace of the great monarch Dorieb,
whom some say to be a demigod and others a god. High is the palace of Dorieb, and many are the
turrets of marble upon its walls. In its wide halls many multitudes assemble, and here hang
the trophies of the ages. And the roof is of pure gold, set upon tall pillars of ruby and azure,
and having such carven figures of gods and heroes that he who looks up to those heights seems
to gaze upon the living Olympus. And the floor of the palace is of glass, under which flow the
cunningly lighted waters of the Narg, gay with gaudy fish not known beyond the bounds of lovely
Cathuria.”
Thus would I speak to myself of Cathuria, but ever would the bearded man warn
me to turn back to the happy shores of Sona-Nyl; for Sona-Nyl is known of men, while none hath
ever beheld Cathuria.
And on the thirty-first day that we followed the bird, we beheld the basalt
pillars of the West. Shrouded in mist they were, so that no man might peer beyond them or see
their summits—which indeed some say reach even to the heavens. And the bearded man again
implored me to turn back, but I heeded him not; for from the mists beyond the basalt pillars
I fancied there came the notes of singer and lutanist; sweeter than the sweetest songs of Sona-Nyl,
and sounding mine own praises; the praises of me, who had voyaged far under the full moon and
dwelt in the Land of Fancy.
So to the sound of melody the White Ship sailed into the mist betwixt the basalt
pillars of the West. And when the music ceased and the mist lifted, we beheld not the Land of
Cathuria, but a swift-rushing resistless sea, over which our helpless barque was borne toward
some unknown goal. Soon to our ears came the distant thunder of falling waters, and to our eyes
appeared on the far horizon ahead the titanic spray of a monstrous cataract, wherein the oceans
of the world drop down to abysmal nothingness. Then did the bearded man say to me with tears
on his cheek: “We have rejected the beautiful Land of Sona-Nyl, which we may never behold
again. The gods are greater than men, and they have conquered.” And I closed my eyes before
the crash that I knew would come, shutting out the sight of the celestial bird which flapped
its mocking blue wings over the brink of the torrent.
Out of that crash came darkness, and I heard the shrieking of men and of things
which were not men. From the East tempestuous winds arose, and chilled me as I crouched on the
slab of damp stone which had risen beneath my feet. Then as I heard another crash I opened my
eyes and beheld myself upon the platform of that lighthouse from whence I had sailed so many
aeons ago. In the darkness below there loomed the vast blurred outlines of a vessel breaking
up on the cruel rocks, and as I glanced out over the waste I saw that the light had failed for
the first time since my grandfather had assumed its care.
And in the later watches of the night, when I went within the tower, I saw
on the wall a calendar which still remained as when I had left it at the hour I sailed away.
With the dawn I descended the tower and looked for wreckage upon the rocks, but what I found
was only this: a strange dead bird whose hue was as of the azure sky, and a single shattered
spar, of a whiteness greater than that of the wave-tips or of the mountain snow.
And thereafter the ocean told me its secrets no more; and though many times
since has the moon shone full and high in the heavens, the White Ship from the South came never
again.


Through the Gates of the Silver Key

I.

In a vast room hung with strangely figured arras and carpeted with Bokhara rugs of impressive
age and workmanship four men were sitting around a document-strown table. From the far corners,
where odd tripods of wrought-iron were now and then replenished by an incredibly aged negro
in sombre livery, came the hypnotic fumes of olibanum; while in a deep niche on one side there
ticked a curious coffin-shaped clock whose dial bore baffling hieroglyphs and whose four hands
did not move in consonance with any time system known on this planet. It was a singular and
disturbing room, but well fitted to the business now at hand. For here, in the New Orleans home
of this continent’s greatest mystic, mathematician, and orientalist, there was being
settled at last the estate of a scarcely less great mystic, scholar, author, and dreamer who
had vanished from the face of the earth four years before.
Randolph Carter, who had all his life sought to escape from the tedium and
limitations of waking reality in the beckoning vistas of dreams and fabled avenues of other
dimensions, disappeared from the sight of man on the seventh of October, 1928, at the age of
fifty-four. His career had been a strange and lonely one, and there were those who inferred
from his curious novels many episodes more bizarre than any in his recorded history. His association
with Harley Warren, the South Carolina mystic whose studies in the primal Naacal language of
the Himalayan priests had led to such outrageous conclusions, had been close. Indeed, it was
he who—one mist-mad, terrible night in an ancient graveyard—had seen Warren descend
into a dank and nitrous vault, never to emerge. Carter lived in Boston, but it was from the
wild, haunted hills behind hoary and witch-accursed Arkham that all his forbears had come.
And it was amid those ancient, cryptically brooding hills that he had ultimately vanished.
His old servant Parks—who died early in 1930—had spoken of the
strangely aromatic and hideously carven box he had found in the attic, and of the undecipherable
parchments and queerly figured silver key which that box had contained; matters of which Carter
had also written to others. Carter, he said, had told him that this key had come down from his
ancestors, and that it would help him to unlock the gate to his lost boyhood, and to strange
dimensions and fantastic realms which he had hitherto visited only in vague, brief, and elusive
dreams. Then one day Carter took the box and its contents and rode away in his car, never to
return.
Later on people found the car at the side of an old, grass-grown road in the
hills behind crumbling Arkham—the hills where Carter’s forbears had once dwelt,
and where the ruined cellar of the great Carter homestead still gaped to the sky. It was in
a grove of tall elms near by that another of the Carters had mysteriously vanished in 1781,
and not far away was the half-rotted cottage where Goody Fowler the witch had brewed her ominous
potions still earlier. The region had been settled in 1692 by fugitives from the witchcraft
trials in Salem, and even now it bore a name for vaguely ominous things scarcely to be envisaged.
Edmund Carter had fled from the shadow of Gallows Hill just in time, and the tales of his sorceries
were many. Now, it seemed, his lone descendant had gone somewhere to join him.
In the car they found the hideously carved box of fragrant wood, and the parchment
which no man could read. The Silver Key was gone—presumably with Carter. Further than
that there was no certain clue. Detectives from Boston said that the fallen timbers of the
old Carter place seemed oddly disturbed, and somebody found a handkerchief on the rock-ridged,
sinisterly wooded slope behind the ruins near the dreaded cave called the “Snake-Den”.
It was then that the country legends about the Snake-Den gained a new vitality. Farmers whispered
of the blasphemous uses to which old Edmund Carter the wizard had put that horrible grotto,
and added later tales about the fondness which Randolph Carter himself had had for it when a
boy. In Carter’s boyhood the venerable gambrel-roofed homestead was still standing and
tenanted by his great-uncle Christopher. He had visited there often, and had talked singularly
about the Snake-Den. People remembered what he had said about a deep fissure and an unknown
inner cave beyond, and speculated on the change he had shewn after spending one whole memorable
day in the cavern when he was nine. That was in October, too—and ever after that he had
seemed to have an uncanny knack at prophesying future events.
It had rained late in the night that Carter vanished, and no one was quite
able to trace his footprints from the car. Inside the Snake-Den all was amorphous liquid mud
owing to copious seepage. Only the ignorant rustics whispered about the prints they thought
they spied where the great elms overhang the road, and on the sinister hillside near the Snake-Den,
where the handkerchief was found. Who could pay attention to whispers that spoke of stubby little
tracks like those which Randolph Carter’s square-toed boots made when he was a small boy?
It was as crazy a notion as that other whisper—that the tracks of old Benijah Corey’s
peculiar heel-less boots had met the stubby little tracks in the road. Old Benijah had been
the Carters’ hired man when Randolph was young—but he had died thirty years ago.
It must have been these whispers—plus Carter’s own statement to
Parks and others that the queerly arabesqued Silver Key would help him unlock the gate of his
lost boyhood—which caused a number of mystical students to declare that the missing man
had actually doubled back on the trail of time and returned through forty-five years to that
other October day in 1883 when he had stayed in the Snake-Den as a small boy. When he came out
that night, they argued, he had somehow made the whole trip to 1928 and back—for did he
not thereafter know of things which were to happen later? And yet he had never spoken of anything
to happen after 1928.
One student—an elderly eccentric of Providence, Rhode Island, who had
enjoyed a long and close correspondence with Carter—had a still more elaborate theory,
and believed that Carter had not only returned to boyhood, but achieved a further liberation,
roving at will through the prismatic vistas of boyhood dream. After a strange vision this man
published a tale of Carter’s vanishing, in which he hinted that the lost one now reigned
as king on the opal throne of Ilek-Vad, that fabulous town of turrets atop the hollow cliffs
of glass overlooking the twilight sea wherein the bearded and finny Gnorri build their singular
labyrinths.
It was this old man, Ward Phillips, who pleaded most loudly against the apportionment
of Carter’s estate to his heirs—all distant cousins—on the ground that he
was still alive in another time-dimension and might well return some day. Against him was arrayed
the legal talent of one of the cousins, Ernest B. Aspinwall of Chicago, a man ten years Carter’s
senior, but keen as a youth in forensic battles. For four years the contest had raged, but
now the time for apportionment had come, and this vast, strange room in New Orleans was to be
the scene of the arrangements.
It was the home of Carter’s literary and financial executor—the
distinguished Creole student of mysteries and Eastern antiquities, Etienne-Laurent de Marigny.
Carter had met de Marigny during the war, when they both served in the French Foreign Legion,
and had at once cleaved to him because of their similar tastes and outlook. When, on a memorable
joint furlough, the learned young Creole had taken the wistful Boston dreamer to Bayonne, in
the south of France, and had shewn him certain terrible secrets in the nighted and immemorial
crypts that burrow beneath that brooding, aeon-weighted city, the friendship was forever sealed.
Carter’s will had named de Marigny as executor, and now that vivid scholar was reluctantly
presiding over the settlement of the estate. It was sad work for him, for like the old Rhode-Islander
he did not believe that Carter was dead. But what weight have the dreams of mystics against
the harsh wisdom of the world?
Around the table in that strange room in the old French quarter sat the men
who claimed an interest in the proceedings. There had been the usual legal advertisements of
the conference in papers wherever Carter heirs were thought to live, yet only four now sat listening
to the abnormal ticking of that coffin-shaped clock which told no earthly time, and to the bubbling
of the courtyard fountain beyond half-curtained, fanlighted windows. As the hours wore on the
faces of the four were half-shrouded in the curling fumes from the tripods, which, piled recklessly
with fuel, seemed to need less and less attention from the silently gliding and increasingly
nervous old negro.
There was Etienne de Marigny himself—slim, dark, handsome, moustached,
and still young. Aspinwall, representing the heirs, was white-haired, apoplectic-faced, side-whiskered,
and portly. Phillips, the Providence mystic, was lean, grey, long-nosed, clean-shaven, and
stoop-shouldered. The fourth man was non-committal in age—lean, and with a dark, bearded,
singularly immobile face of very regular contour, bound with the turban of a high-caste Brahmin
and having night-black, burning, almost irisless eyes which seemed to gaze out from a vast distance
behind the features. He had announced himself as the Swami Chandraputra, an adept from Benares
with important information to give; and both de Marigny and Phillips—who had corresponded
with him—had been quick to recognise the genuineness of his mystical pretensions. His
speech had an oddly forced, hollow, metallic quality, as if the use of English taxed his vocal
apparatus; yet his language was as easy, correct, and idiomatic as any native Anglo-Saxon’s.
In general attire he was the normal European civilian, but his loose clothes sat peculiarly
badly on him, while his bushy black beard, Eastern turban, and large white mittens gave him
an air of exotic eccentricity.
De Marigny, fingering the parchment found in Carter’s car, was speaking.
“No, I have not been able to make anything of the parchment. Mr. Phillips,
here, also gives it up. Col. Churchward declares it is not Naacal, and it looks nothing at all
like the hieroglyphs on that Easter Island wooden club. The carvings on that box, though, do
strongly suggest Easter Island images. The nearest thing I can recall to these parchment characters—notice
how all the letters seem to hang down from horizontal word-bars—is the writing in a book
poor Harley Warren once had. It came from India while Carter and I were visiting him in 1919,
and he never would tell us anything about it. Said it would be better if we didn’t know,
and hinted that it might have come originally from some place other than the earth. He took
it with him in December when he went down into the vault in that old graveyard—but neither
he nor the book ever came to the surface again. Some time ago I sent our friend here—the
Swami Chandraputra—a memory-sketch of some of those letters, and also a photostatic copy
of the Carter parchment. He believes he may be able to shed light on them after certain references
and consultations.
“But the key—Carter sent me a photograph of that. Its curious arabesques
were not letters, but seem to have belonged to the same culture-tradition as the hieroglyphs
on the parchment. Carter always spoke of being on the point of solving the mystery, though he
never gave details. Once he grew almost poetic about the whole business. That antique Silver
Key, he said, would unlock the successive doors that bar our free march down the mighty corridors
of space and time to the very Border which no man has crossed since Shaddad with his terrific
genius built and concealed in the sands of Arabia Petraea the prodigious domes and uncounted
minarets of thousand-pillared Irem. Half-starved dervishes—wrote Carter—and thirst-crazed
nomads have returned to tell of that monumental portal, and of the Hand that is sculptured above
the keystone of the arch, but no man has passed and returned to say that his footprints on the
garnet-strown sands within bear witness to his visit. The key, he surmised, was that for which
the Cyclopean sculptured Hand vainly grasps.
“Why Carter didn’t take the parchment as well as the key, we cannot
say. Perhaps he forgot it—or perhaps he forbore to take it through recollection of one
who had taken a book of like characters into a vault and never returned. Or perhaps it was really
immaterial to what he wished to do.”
As de Marigny paused, old Mr. Phillips spoke in a harsh, shrill voice.
“We can know of Randolph Carter’s wandering only what we dream.
I have been to many strange places in dreams, and have heard many strange and significant things
in Ulthar, beyond the river Skai. It does not appear that the parchment was needed, for certainly
Carter reëntered the world of his boyhood dreams, and is now a king in Ilek-Vad.”
Mr. Aspinwall grew doubly apoplectic-looking as he sputtered.
“Can’t somebody shut that old fool up? We’ve had enough of
these moonings. The problem is to divide the property, and it’s about time we got to it.”
For the first time Swami Chandraputra spoke in his queerly alien voice.
“Gentlemen, there is more to this matter than you think. Mr. Aspinwall
does not do well to laugh at the evidence of dreams. Mr. Phillips has taken an incomplete view—perhaps
because he has not dreamed enough. I, myself, have done much dreaming—we in India have
always done that, just as all the Carters seem to have done it. You, Mr. Aspinwall, as a maternal
cousin, are naturally not a Carter. My own dreams, and certain other sources of information,
have told me a great deal which you still find obscure. For example, Randolph Carter forgot
that parchment—which he couldn’t then decipher—yet it would have been well
for him had he remembered to take it. You see, I have really learned pretty much what happened
to Carter after he left his car with the Silver Key at sunset on that seventh of October, four
years ago.”
Aspinwall audibly sneered, but the others sat up with heightened interest.
The smoke from the tripods increased, and the crazy ticking of that coffin-shaped clock seemed
to fall into bizarre patterns like the dots and dashes of some alien and insoluble telegraph
message from outer space. The Hindoo leaned back, half closed his eyes, and continued in that
oddly laboured yet idiomatic voice, while before his audience there began to float a picture
of what had happened to Randolph Carter.
II.

The hills behind Arkham are full of a strange magic—something, perhaps, which the old
wizard Edmund Carter called down from the stars and up from the crypts of nether earth when
he fled there from Salem in 1692. As soon as Randolph Carter was back among them he knew that
he was close to one of the gates which a few audacious, abhorred, and alien-souled men have
blasted through titan walls betwixt the world and the outside absolute. Here, he felt, and on
this day of the year, he could carry out with success the message he had deciphered months before
from the arabesques of that tarnished and incredibly ancient Silver Key. He knew now how it
must be rotated, how it must be held up to the setting sun, and what syllables of ceremony must
be intoned into the void at the ninth and last turning. In a spot as close to a dark polarity
and induced gate as this, it could not fail in its primary function. Certainly, he would rest
that night in the lost boyhood for which he had never ceased to mourn.
He got out of the car with the key in his pocket, walking uphill deeper and
deeper into the shadowy core of that brooding, haunted countryside of winding road, vine-grown
stone wall, black woodland, gnarled, neglected orchard, gaping-windowed, deserted farmhouse,
and nameless ruin. At the sunset hour, when the distant spires of Kingsport gleamed in the ruddy
blaze, he took out the key and made the needed turnings and intonations. Only later did he realise
how soon the ritual had taken effect.
Then in the deepening twilight he had heard a voice out of the past. Old Benijah
Corey, his great-uncle’s hired man. Had not old Benijah been dead for thirty years? Thirty
years before when? What was time? Where had he been? Why was it strange that Benijah should
be calling him on this seventh of October, 1883? Was he not out later than Aunt Martha had told
him to stay? What was this key in his blouse pocket, where his little telescope—given
him by his father on his ninth birthday two months before—ought to be? Had he found it
in the attic at home? Would it unlock the mystic pylon which his sharp eye had traced amidst
the jagged rocks at the back of that inner cave behind the Snake-Den on the hill? That was the
place they always coupled with old Edmund Carter the wizard. People wouldn’t go there,
and nobody but him had ever noticed or squirmed through the root-choked fissure to that great
black inner chamber with the pylon. Whose hands had carved that hint of a pylon out of the living
rock? Old Wizard Edmund’s—or others that he had conjured up and commanded?
That evening little Randolph ate supper with Uncle Chris and Aunt Martha in the old gambrel-roofed
farmhouse.
Next morning he was up early, and out through the twisted-boughed apple orchard
to the upper timber-lot where the mouth of the Snake-Den lurked black and forbidding amongst
grotesque, overnourished oaks. A nameless expectancy was upon him, and he did not even notice
the loss of his handkerchief as he fumbled in his blouse pocket to see if the queer Silver Key
was safe. He crawled through the dark orifice with tense, adventurous assurance, lighting his
way with matches taken from the sitting-room. In another moment he had wriggled through the
root-choked fissure at the farther end, and was in the vast, unknown inner grotto whose ultimate
rock wall seemed half like a monstrous and consciously shapen pylon. Before that dank, dripping
wall he stood silent and awestruck, lighting one match after another as he gazed. Was that stony
bulge above the keystone of the imagined arch really a gigantic sculptured hand? Then he drew
forth the Silver Key, and made motions and intonations whose source he could only dimly remember.
Was anything forgotten? He knew only that he wished to cross the barrier to the untrammelled
land of his dreams and the gulfs where all dimensions dissolve in the absolute.
III.

What happened then is scarcely to be described in words. It is full of those paradoxes, contradictions,
and anomalies which have no place in waking life, but which fill our more fantastic dreams,
and are taken as matters of course till we return to our narrow, rigid, objective world of limited
causation and tri-dimensional logic. As the Hindoo continued his tale, he had difficulty in
avoiding what seemed—even more than the notion of a man transferred through the years
to boyhood—an air of trivial, puerile extravagance. Mr. Aspinwall, in disgust, gave an
apoplectic snort and virtually stopped listening.
For the rite of the Silver Key, as practiced by Randolph Carter in that black,
haunted cave within a cave, did not prove unavailing. From the first gesture and syllable an
aura of strange, awesome mutation was apparent—a sense of incalculable disturbance and
confusion in time and space, yet one which held no hint of what we recognise as motion and duration.
Imperceptibly, such things as age and location ceased to have any significance whatever. The
day before, Randolph Carter had miraculously leaped a gulf of years. Now there was no distinction
between boy and man. There was only the entity Randolph Carter, with a certain store of images
which had lost all connexion with terrestrial scenes and circumstances of acquisition. A moment
before, there had been an inner cave with vague suggestions of a monstrous arch and gigantic
sculptured hand on the farther wall. Now there was neither cave nor absence of cave; neither
wall nor absence of wall. There was only a flux of impressions not so much visual as cerebral,
amidst which the entity that was Randolph Carter experienced perceptions or registrations of
all that his mind revolved on, yet without any clear consciousness of the way in which he received
them.
By the time the rite was over Carter knew that he was in no region whose place
could be told by earth’s geographers, and in no age whose date history could fix. For
the nature of what was happening was not wholly unfamiliar to him. There were hints of it in
the cryptical Pnakotic fragments, and a whole chapter in the forbidden Necronomicon
of the mad Arab Abdul Alhazred had taken on significance when he had deciphered the designs
graven on the Silver Key. A gate had been unlocked—not indeed the Ultimate Gate, but
one leading from earth and time to that extension of earth which is outside time, and from which
in turn the Ultimate Gate leads fearsomely and perilously to the Last Void which is outside
all earths, all universes, and all matter.
There would be a Guide—and a very terrible one; a Guide who had been
an entity of earth millions of years before, when man was undreamed of, and when forgotten shapes
moved on a steaming planet building strange cities among whose last, crumbling ruins the earliest
mammals were to play. Carter remembered what the monstrous Necronomicon had vaguely and
disconcertingly adumbrated concerning that Guide.
“And while there are those,” the mad Arab had written, “who
have dared to seek glimpses beyond the Veil, and to accept HIM as a Guide, they would have been
more prudent had they avoided commerce with HIM; for it is written in the Book of Thoth how
terrific is the price of a single glimpse. Nor may those who pass ever return, for in the Vastnesses
transcending our world are Shapes of darkness that seize and bind. The Affair that shambleth
about in the night, the Evil that defieth the Elder Sign, the Herd that stand watch at the secret
portal each tomb is known to have, and that thrive on that which groweth out of the tenants
within—all these Blacknesses are lesser than HE Who guardeth the Gateway; HE Who will
guide the rash one beyond all the worlds into the Abyss of unnamable Devourers. For HE is’UMR
AT-TAWIL, the Most Ancient One, which the scribe rendereth as THE PROLONGED OF LIFE.”
Memory and imagination shaped dim half-pictures with uncertain outlines amidst
the seething chaos, but Carter knew that they were of memory and imagination only. Yet he felt
that it was not chance which built these things in his consciousness, but rather some vast reality,
ineffable and undimensioned, which surrounded him and strove to translate itself into the only
symbols he was capable of grasping. For no mind of earth may grasp the extensions of shape which
interweave in the oblique gulfs outside time and the dimensions we know.
There floated before Carter a cloudy pageantry of shapes and scenes which he
somehow linked with earth’s primal, aeon-forgotten past. Monstrous living things moved
deliberately through vistas of fantastic handiwork that no sane dream ever held, and landscapes
bore incredible vegetation and cliffs and mountains and masonry of no human pattern. There were
cities under the sea, and denizens thereof; and towers in great deserts where globes and cylinders
and nameless winged entities shot off into space or hurtled down out of space. All this Carter
grasped, though the images bore no fixed relation to one another or to him. He himself had no
stable form or position, but only such shifting hints of form and position as his whirling fancy
supplied.
He had wished to find the enchanted regions of his boyhood dreams, where galleys
sail up the river Oukranos past the gilded spires of Thran, and elephant caravans tramp through
perfumed jungles in Kled beyond forgotten palaces with veined ivory columns that sleep lovely
and unbroken under the moon. Now, intoxicated with wider visions, he scarcely knew what he sought.
Thoughts of infinite and blasphemous daring rose in his mind, and he knew he would face the
dreaded Guide without fear, asking monstrous and terrible things of him.
All at once the pageant of impressions seemed to achieve a vague kind of stabilisation.
There were great masses of towering stone, carven into alien and incomprehensible designs and
disposed according to the laws of some unknown, inverse geometry. Light filtered down from a
sky of no assignable colour in baffling, contradictory directions, and played almost sentiently
over what seemed to be a curved line of gigantic hieroglyphed pedestals more hexagonal than
otherwise and surmounted by cloaked, ill-defined Shapes.
There was another Shape, too, which occupied no pedestal, but which seemed
to glide or float over the cloudy, floor-like lower level. It was not exactly permanent in outline,
but held transient suggestions of something remotely preceding or paralleling the human form,
though half as large again as an ordinary man. It seemed to be heavily cloaked, like the Shapes
on the pedestals, with some neutral-coloured fabric; and Carter could not detect any eye-holes
through which it might gaze. Probably it did not need to gaze, for it seemed to belong to an
order of being far outside the merely physical in organisation and faculties.
A moment later Carter knew that this was so, for the Shape had spoken to his
mind without sound or language. And though the name it uttered was a dreaded and terrible one,
Randolph Carter did not flinch in fear. Instead, he spoke back, equally without sound or language,
and made those obeisances which the hideous Necronomicon had taught him to make. For
this Shape was nothing less than that which all the world has feared since Lomar rose out of
the sea and the Winged Ones came to earth to teach the Elder Lore to man. It was indeed the
frightful Guide and Guardian of the Gate—’Umr at-Tawil, the ancient one, which the
scribe rendereth the Prolonged of Life.
The Guide knew, as he knew all things, of Carter’s quest and coming,
and that this seeker of dreams and secrets stood before him unafraid. There was no horror or
malignity in what he radiated, and Carter wondered for a moment whether the mad Arab’s
terrific blasphemous hints, and extracts from the Book of Thoth, might not have come from envy
and a baffled wish to do what was now about to be done. Or perhaps the Guide reserved his horror
and malignity for those who feared. As the radiations continued, Carter mentally interpreted
them in the form of words.
“I am indeed that Most Ancient One,” said the Guide, “of
whom you know. We have awaited you—the Ancient Ones and I. You are welcome, even though
long delayed. You have the Key, and have unlocked the First Gate. Now the Ultimate Gate is ready
for your trial. If you fear, you need not advance. You may still go back unharmed the way you
came. But if you choose to advance . . .”
The pause was ominous, but the radiations continued to be friendly. Carter
hesitated not a moment, for a burning curiosity drove him on.
“I will advance,” he radiated back, “and I accept you as
my Guide.”
At this reply the Guide seemed to make a sign by certain motions of his robe
which may or may not have involved the lifting of an arm or some homologous member. A second
sign followed, and from his well-learnt lore Carter knew that he was at last very close to the
Ultimate Gate. The light now changed to another inexplicable colour, and the Shapes on the
quasi-hexagonal pedestals became more clearly defined. As they sat more erect, their outlines
became more like those of men, though Carter knew that they could not be men. Upon their cloaked
heads there now seemed to rest tall, uncertainly coloured mitres, strangely suggestive of those
on certain nameless figures chiselled by a forgotten sculptor along the living cliffs of a high,
forbidden mountain in Tartary; while grasped in certain folds of their swathings were long sceptres
whose carven heads bodied forth a grotesque and archaic mystery.
Carter guessed what they were, whence they came, and Whom they served; and
guessed, too, the price of their service. But he was still content, for at one mighty venture
he was to learn all. Damnation, he reflected, is but a word bandied about by those whose blindness
leads them to condemn all who can see, even with a single eye. He wondered at the vast conceit
of those who had babbled of the malignant Ancient Ones, as if They could pause from their
everlasting dreams to wreak a wrath upon mankind. As well, he thought, might a mammoth pause
to visit frantic vengeance on an angleworm. Now the whole assemblage on the vaguely hexagonal
pillars was greeting him with a gesture of those oddly carven sceptres, and radiating a message
which he understood:
“We salute you, Most Ancient One, and you, Randolph Carter, whose daring
has made you one of us.”
Carter saw now that one of the pedestals was vacant, and a gesture of the Most
Ancient One told him it was reserved for him. He saw also another pedestal, taller than the
rest, and at the centre of the oddly curved line (neither semicircle nor ellipse, parabola nor
hyperbola) which they formed. This, he guessed, was the Guide’s own throne. Moving and
rising in a manner hardly definable, Carter took his seat; and as he did so he saw that the
Guide had likewise seated himself.
Gradually and mistily it became apparent that the Most Ancient One was holding
something—some object clutched in the outflung folds of his robe as if for the sight,
or what answered for sight, of the cloaked Companions. It was a large sphere or apparent sphere
of some obscurely iridescent metal, and as the Guide put it forward a low, pervasive half-impression
of sound began to rise and fall in intervals which seemed to be rhythmic even though
they followed no rhythm of earth. There was a suggestion of chanting—or what human imagination
might interpret as chanting. Presently the quasi-sphere began to grow luminous, and as it gleamed
up into a cold, pulsating light of unassignable colour Carter saw that its flickerings conformed
to the alien rhythm of the chant. Then all the mitred, sceptre-bearing Shapes on the pedestals
commenced a slight, curious swaying in the same inexplicable rhythm, while nimbuses of unclassifiable
light—resembling that of the quasi-sphere—played round their shrouded heads.
The Hindoo paused in his tale and looked curiously at the tall, coffin-shaped
clock with the four hands and hieroglyphed dial, whose crazy ticking followed no known rhythm
of earth.
“You, Mr. de Marigny,” he suddenly said to his learned host, “do
not need to be told the particular alien rhythm to which those cowled Shapes on the hexagonal
pillars chanted and nodded. You are the only one else—in America—who has had a taste
of the Outer Extension. That clock—I suppose it was sent you by the Yogi poor Harley Warren
used to talk about—the seer who said that he alone of living men had been to Yian-Ho,
the hidden legacy of sinister, aeon-old Leng, and had borne certain things away from that dreadful
and forbidden city. I wonder how many of its subtler properties you know? If my dreams and readings
be correct, it was made by those who knew much of the First Gateway. But let me go on with my
tale.”
At last, continued the Swami, the swaying and the suggestion of chanting ceased,
the lambent nimbuses around the now drooping and motionless heads faded away, while the cloaked
Shapes slumped curiously on their pedestals. The quasi-sphere, however, continued to pulsate
with inexplicable light. Carter felt that the Ancient Ones were sleeping as they had been when
he first saw them, and he wondered out of what cosmic dreams his coming had wakened them. Slowly
there filtered into his mind the truth that this strange chanting ritual had been one of instruction,
and that the Companions had been chanted by the Most Ancient One into a new and peculiar kind
of sleep, in order that their dreams might open the Ultimate Gate to which the Silver Key was
a passport. He knew that in the profundity of this deep sleep they were contemplating unplumbed
vastnesses of utter and absolute Outsideness with which the earth had nothing to do, and that
they were to accomplish that which his presence had demanded.
The Guide did not share this sleep, but seemed still to be giving instructions
in some subtle, soundless way. Evidently he was implanting images of those things which he
wished the Companions to dream; and Carter knew that as each of the Ancient Ones pictured the
prescribed thought, there would be born the nucleus of a manifestation visible to his own earthly
eyes. When the dreams of all the Shapes had achieved a oneness, that manifestation would occur,
and everything he required be materialised, through concentration. He had seen such things
on earth—in India, where the combined, projected will of a circle of adepts can make a
thought take tangible substance, and in hoary Atlaanât, of which few men dare speak.
Just what the Ultimate Gate was, and how it was to be passed, Carter could
not be certain; but a feeling of tense expectancy surged over him. He was conscious of having
a kind of body, and of holding the fateful Silver Key in his hand. The masses of towering stone
opposite him seemed to possess the evenness of a wall, toward the centre of which his eyes were
irresistibly drawn. And then suddenly he felt the mental currents of the Most Ancient One cease
to flow forth.
For the first time Carter realised how terrific utter silence, mental and physical,
may be. The earlier moments had never failed to contain some perceptible rhythm, if only the
faint, cryptical pulse of the earth’s dimensional extension, but now the hush of the abyss
seemed to fall upon everything. Despite his intimations of body, he had no audible breath; and
the glow of ’Umr at-Tawil’s quasi-sphere had grown petrifiedly fixed and unpulsating.
A potent nimbus, brighter than those which had played round the heads of the Shapes, blazed
frozenly over the shrouded skull of the terrible Guide.
A dizziness assailed Carter, and his sense of lost orientation waxed a thousandfold.
The strange lights seemed to hold the quality of the most impenetrable blacknesses heaped upon
blacknesses, while about the Ancient Ones, so close on their pseudo-hexagonal thrones, there
hovered an air of the most stupefying remoteness. Then he felt himself wafted into immeasurable
depths, with waves of perfumed warmth lapping against his face. It was as if he floated in a
torrid, rose-tinctured sea; a sea of drugged wine whose waves broke foaming against shores of
brazen fire. A great fear clutched him as he half saw that vast expanse of surging sea lapping
against its far-off coast. But the moment of silence was broken—the surgings were speaking
to him in a language that was not of physical sound or articulate words.
“The man of Truth is beyond good and evil,” intoned a voice that
was not a voice. “The man of Truth has ridden to All-Is-One. The man of Truth has learnt
that Illusion is the only reality, and that substance is an impostor.”
And now, in that rise of masonry to which his eyes had been so irresistibly
drawn, there appeared the outline of a titanic arch not unlike that which he thought he had
glimpsed so long ago in that cave within a cave, on the far, unreal surface of the three-dimensioned
earth. He realised that he had been using the Silver Key—moving it in accord with an unlearnt
and instinctive ritual closely akin to that which had opened the Inner Gate. That rose-drunken
sea which lapped his cheeks was, he realised, no more or less than the adamantine mass of the
solid wall yielding before his spell, and the vortex of thought with which the Ancient Ones
had aided his spell. Still guided by instinct and blind determination, he floated forward—and
through the Ultimate Gate.
IV.

Randolph Carter’s advance through that Cyclopean bulk of abnormal masonry was like a dizzy
precipitation through the measureless gulfs between the stars. From a great distance he felt
triumphant, godlike surges of deadly sweetness, and after that the rustling of great wings,
and impressions of sound like the chirpings and murmurings of objects unknown on earth or in
the solar system. Glancing backward, he saw not one gate alone, but a multiplicity of gates,
at some of which clamoured Forms he strove not to remember.
And then, suddenly, he felt a greater terror than that which any of the Forms
could give—a terror from which he could not flee because it was connected with himself.
Even the First Gateway had taken something of stability from him, leaving him uncertain about
his bodily form and about his relationship to the mistily defined objects around him, but it
had not disturbed his sense of unity. He had still been Randolph Carter, a fixed point in the
dimensional seething. Now, beyond the Ultimate Gateway, he realised in a moment of consuming
fright that he was not one person, but many persons.
He was in many places at the same time. On earth, on October 7, 1883, a little
boy named Randolph Carter was leaving the Snake-Den in the hushed evening light and running
down the rocky slope and through the twisted-boughed orchard toward his Uncle Christopher’s
house in the hills beyond Arkham—yet at that same moment, which was also somehow in the
earthly year of 1928, a vague shadow not less Randolph Carter was sitting on a pedestal among
the Ancient Ones in earth’s trans-dimensional extension. Here, too, was a third Randolph
Carter in the unknown and formless cosmic abyss beyond the Ultimate Gate. And elsewhere, in
a chaos of scenes whose infinite multiplicity and monstrous diversity brought him close to the
brink of madness, were a limitless confusion of beings which he knew were as much himself as
the local manifestation now beyond the Ultimate Gate.
There were “Carters” in settings belonging to every known and suspected
age of earth’s history, and to remoter ages of earthly entity transcending knowledge,
suspicion, and credibility. “Carters” of forms both human and non-human, vertebrate
and invertebrate, conscious and mindless, animal and vegetable. And more, there were “Carters”
having nothing in common with earthly life, but moving outrageously amidst backgrounds of other
planets and systems and galaxies and cosmic continua. Spores of eternal life drifting from
world to world, universe to universe, yet all equally himself. Some of the glimpses recalled
dreams—both faint and vivid, single and persistent—which he had had through the
long years since he first began to dream, and a few possessed a haunting, fascinating, and almost
horrible familiarity which no earthly logic could explain.
Faced with this realisation, Randolph Carter reeled in the clutch of supreme
horror—horror such as had not been hinted even at the climax of that hideous night when
two had ventured into an ancient and abhorred necropolis under a waning moon and only one had
emerged. No death, no doom, no anguish can arouse the surpassing despair which flows from a
loss of identity. Merging with nothingness is peaceful oblivion; but to be aware of existence
and yet to know that one is no longer a definite being distinguished from other beings—that
one no longer has a self—that is the nameless summit of agony and dread.
He knew that there had been a Randolph Carter of Boston, yet could not be sure
whether he—the fragment or facet of an earthly entity beyond the Ultimate Gate—had
been that one or some other. His self had been annihilated; and yet he—if indeed
there could, in view of that utter nullity of individual existence, be such a thing as he—was
equally aware of being in some inconceivable way a legion of selves. It was as though his body
had been suddenly transformed into one of those many-limbed and many-headed effigies sculptured
in Indian temples, and he contemplated the aggregation in a bewildered attempt to discern which
was the original and which the additions—if indeed (supremely monstrous thought) there
were any original as distinguished from other embodiments.
Then, in the midst of these devastating reflections, Carter’s beyond-the-gate
fragment was hurled from what had seemed the nadir of horror to black, clutching pits of a horror
still more profound. This time it was largely external—a force or personality which at
once confronted and surrounded and pervaded him, and which in addition to its local presence,
seemed also to be a part of himself, and likewise to be coexistent with all time and coterminous
with all space. There was no visual image, yet the sense of entity and the awful concept of
combined localism, identity, and infinity lent a paralysing terror beyond anything which any
Carter-fragment had hitherto deemed capable of existing.
In the face of that awful wonder, the quasi-Carter forgot the horror of destroyed
individuality. It was an All-in-One and One-in-All of limitless being and self—not merely
a thing of one Space-Time continuum, but allied to the ultimate animating essence of existence’s
whole unbounded sweep—the last, utter sweep which has no confines and which outreaches
fancy and mathematics alike. It was perhaps that which certain secret cults of earth have whispered
of as YOG-SOTHOTH, and which has been a deity under other names; that which the crustaceans
of Yuggoth worship as the Beyond-One, and which the vaporous brains of the spiral nebulae know
by an untranslatable Sign—yet in a flash the Carter-facet realised how slight and fractional
all these conceptions are.
And now the BEING was addressing the Carter-facet in prodigious waves that
smote and burned and thundered—a concentration of energy that blasted its recipient with
well-nigh unendurable violence, and that followed, with certain definite variations, the singular
unearthly rhythm which had marked the chanting and swaying of the Ancient Ones, and the flickering
of the monstrous lights, in that baffling region beyond the First Gate. It was as though suns
and worlds and universes had converged upon one point whose very position in space they had
conspired to annihilate with an impact of resistless fury. But amidst the greater terror one
lesser terror was diminished; for the searing waves appeared somehow to isolate the beyond-the-gate
Carter from his infinity of duplicates—to restore, as it were, a certain amount of the
illusion of identity. After a time the hearer began to translate the waves into speech-forms
known to him, and his sense of horror and oppression waned. Fright became pure awe, and what
had seemed blasphemously abnormal seemed now only ineffably majestic.
“Randolph Carter,” IT seemed to say, “MY manifestations on
your planet’s extension, the Ancient Ones, have sent you as one who would lately have
returned to small lands of dream which he had lost, yet who with greater freedom has risen to
greater and nobler desires and curiosities. You wished to sail up golden Oukranos, to search
out forgotten ivory cities in orchid-heavy Kled, and to reign on the opal throne of Ilek-Vad,
whose fabulous towers and numberless domes rise mighty toward a single red star in a firmament
alien to your earth and to all matter. Now, with the passing of two Gates, you wish loftier
things. You would not flee like a child from a scene disliked to a dream beloved, but would
plunge like a man into that last and inmost of secrets which lies behind all scenes and dreams.
“What you wish, I have found good; and I am ready to grant that which
I have granted eleven times only to beings of your planet—five times only to those you
call men, or those resembling them. I am ready to shew you the Ultimate Mystery, to look on
which is to blast a feeble spirit. Yet before you gaze full at that last and first of secrets
you may still wield a free choice, and return if you will through the two Gates with the Veil
still unrent before your eyes.”
V.

A sudden shutting-off of the waves left Carter in a chilling and awesome silence full of the
spirit of desolation. On every hand pressed the illimitable vastness of the void, yet the seeker
knew that the BEING was still there. After a moment he thought of words whose mental substance
he flung into the abyss:
“I accept. I will not retreat.”
The waves surged forth again, and Carter knew that the BEING had heard. And
now there poured from that limitless MIND a flood of knowledge and explanation which opened
new vistas to the seeker, and prepared him for such a grasp of the cosmos as he had never hoped
to possess. He was told how childish and limited is the notion of a tri-dimensional world, and
what an infinity of directions there are besides the known directions of up-down, forward-backward,
right-left. He was shewn the smallness and tinsel emptiness of the little gods of earth, with
their petty, human interests and connexions—their hatreds, rages, loves, and vanities;
their craving for praise and sacrifice, and their demands for faith contrary to reason and Nature.
While most of the impressions translated themselves to Carter as words, there
were others to which other senses gave interpretation. Perhaps with eyes and perhaps with imagination
he perceived that he was in a region of dimensions beyond those conceivable to the eye and brain
of man. He saw now, in the brooding shadows of that which had been first a vortex of power and
then an illimitable void, a sweep of creation that dizzied his senses. From some inconceivable
vantage-point he looked upon prodigious forms whose multiple extensions transcended any conception
of being, size, and boundaries which his mind had hitherto been able to hold, despite a lifetime
of cryptical study. He began to understand dimly why there could exist at the same time the
little boy Randolph Carter in the Arkham farmhouse in 1883, the misty form on the vaguely hexagonal
pillar beyond the First Gate, the fragment now facing the PRESENCE in the limitless abyss, and
all the other “Carters” his fancy or perception envisaged.
Then the waves increased in strength, and sought to improve his understanding,
reconciling him to the multiform entity of which his present fragment was an infinitesimal part.
They told him that every figure of space is but the result of the intersection by a plane of
some corresponding figure of one more dimension—as a square is cut from a cube or a circle
from a sphere. The cube and sphere, of three dimensions, are thus cut from corresponding forms
of four dimensions that men know only through guesses and dreams; and these in turn are cut
from forms of five dimensions, and so on up to the dizzy and reachless heights of archetypal
infinity. The world of men and of the gods of men is merely an infinitesimal phase of an infinitesimal
thing—the three-dimensional phase of that small wholeness reached by the First Gate, where
’Umr at-Tawil dictates dreams to the Ancient Ones. Though men hail it as reality and brand
thoughts of its many-dimensioned original as unreality, it is in truth the very opposite. That
which we call substance and reality is shadow and illusion, and that which we call shadow and
illusion is substance and reality.
Time, the waves went on, is motionless, and without beginning or end. That
it has motion, and is the cause of change, is an illusion. Indeed, it is itself really an illusion,
for except to the narrow sight of beings in limited dimensions there are no such things as past,
present, and future. Men think of time only because of what they call change, yet that too is
illusion. All that was, and is, and is to be, exists simultaneously.
These revelations came with a godlike solemnity which left Carter unable to
doubt. Even though they lay almost beyond his comprehension, he felt that they must be true
in the light of that final cosmic reality which belies all local perspectives and narrow partial
views; and he was familiar enough with profound speculations to be free from the bondage of
local and partial conceptions. Had his whole quest not been based upon a faith in the unreality
of the local and partial?
After an impressive pause the waves continued, saying that what the denizens
of few-dimensioned zones call change is merely a function of their consciousness, which views
the external world from various cosmic angles. As the shapes produced by the cutting of a cone
seem to vary with the angles of cutting—being circle, ellipse, parabola, or hyperbola
according to that angle, yet without any change in the cone itself—so do the local aspects
of an unchanged and endless reality seem to change with the cosmic angle of regarding. To this
variety of angles of consciousness the feeble beings of the inner worlds are slaves, since with
rare exceptions they cannot learn to control them. Only a few students of forbidden things have
gained inklings of this control, and have thereby conquered time and change. But the entities
outside the Gates command all angles, and view the myriad parts of the cosmos in terms of fragmentary,
change-involving perspective, or of the changeless totality beyond perspective, in accordance
with their will.
As the waves paused again, Carter began to comprehend, vaguely and terrifiedly,
the ultimate background of that riddle of lost individuality which had at first so horrified
him. His intuition pieced together the fragments of revelation, and brought him closer and closer
to a grasp of the secret. He understood that much of the frightful revelation would have come
upon him—splitting up his ego amongst myriads of earthly counterparts—inside the
First Gate, had not the magic of ’Umr at-Tawil kept it from him in order that he might
use the Silver Key with precision for the Ultimate Gate’s opening. Anxious for clearer
knowledge, he sent out waves of thought, asking more of the exact relationship between his various
facets—the fragment now beyond the Ultimate Gate, the fragment still on the quasi-hexagonal
pedestal beyond the First Gate, the boy of 1883, the man of 1928, the various ancestral beings
who had formed his heritage and the bulwark of his ego, and the nameless denizens of the other
aeons and other worlds which that first hideous flash of ultimate perception had identified
with him. Slowly the waves of the BEING surged out in reply, trying to make plain what was almost
beyond the reach of an earthly mind.
All descended lines of beings of the finite dimensions, continued the waves,
and all stages of growth in each one of these beings, are merely manifestations of one archetypal
and eternal being in the space outside dimensions. Each local being—son, father, grandfather,
and so on—and each stage of individual being—infant, child, boy, young man, old
man—is merely one of the infinite phases of that same archetypal and eternal being, caused
by a variation in the angle of the consciousness-plane which cuts it. Randolph Carter at all
ages; Randolph Carter and all his ancestors both human and pre-human, terrestrial and pre-terrestrial;
all these were only phases of one ultimate, eternal “Carter” outside space and time—phantom
projections differentiated only by the angle at which the plane of consciousness happened to
cut the eternal archetype in each case.
A slight change of angle could turn the student of today into the child of
yesterday; could turn Randolph Carter into that wizard Edmund Carter who fled from Salem to
the hills behind Arkham in 1692, or that Pickman Carter who in the year 2169 would use strange
means in repelling the Mongol hordes from Australia; could turn a human Carter into one of those
earlier entities which had dwelt in primal Hyperborea and worshipped black, plastic Tsathoggua
after flying down from Kythanil, the double planet that once revolved around Arcturus; could
turn a terrestrial Carter to a remotely ancestral and doubtfully shaped dweller on Kythanil
itself, or a still remoter creature of trans-galactic Shonhi, or a four-dimensioned gaseous
consciousness in an older space-time continuum, or a vegetable brain of the future on a dark
radio-active comet of inconceivable orbit—and so on, in the endless cosmic circle.
The archetypes, throbbed the waves, are the people of the ultimate abyss—formless,
ineffable, and guessed at only by rare dreamers on the low-dimensioned worlds. Chief among such
was this informing BEING itself . . . which indeed was Carter’s own
archetype. The glutless zeal of Carter and all his forbears for forbidden cosmic secrets
was a natural result of derivation from the SUPREME ARCHETYPE. On every world all great wizards,
all great thinkers, all great artists, are facets of IT.
Almost stunned with awe, and with a kind of terrifying delight, Randolph Carter’s
consciousness did homage to that transcendent ENTITY from which it was derived. As the waves
paused again he pondered in the mighty silence, thinking of strange tributes, stranger questions,
and still stranger requests. Curious concepts flowed conflictingly through a brain dazed with
unaccustomed vistas and unforeseen disclosures. It occurred to him that, if those disclosures
were literally true, he might bodily visit all those infinitely distant ages and parts
of the universe which he had hitherto known only in dreams, could he but command the magic to
change the angle of his consciousness-plane. And did not the Silver Key supply that magic? Had
it not first changed him from a man in 1928 to a boy in 1883, and then to something quite outside
time? Oddly, despite his present apparent absence of body, he knew that the Key was still with
him.
While the silence still lasted, Randolph Carter radiated forth the thoughts
and questions which assailed him. He knew that in this ultimate abyss he was equidistant from
every facet of his archetype—human or non-human, earthly or extra-earthly, galactic or
trans-galactic; and his curiosity regarding the other phases of his being—especially those
phases which were farthest from an earthly 1928 in time and space, or which had most persistently
haunted his dreams throughout life—was at fever heat. He felt that his archetypal ENTITY
could at will send him bodily to any of these phases of bygone and distant life by changing
his consciousness-plane, and despite the marvels he had undergone he burned for the further
marvel of walking in the flesh through those grotesque and incredible scenes which visions
of the night had fragmentarily brought him.
Without definite intention he was asking the PRESENCE for access to a dim,
fantastic world whose five multi-coloured suns, alien constellations, dizzy black crags, clawed,
tapir-snouted denizens, bizarre metal towers, unexplained tunnels, and cryptical floating cylinders
had intruded again and again upon his slumbers. That world, he felt vaguely, was in all the
conceivable cosmos the one most freely in touch with others; and he longed to explore the vistas
whose beginnings he had glimpsed, and to embark through space to those still remoter worlds
with which the clawed, snouted denizens trafficked. There was no time for fear. As at all crises
of his strange life, sheer cosmic curiosity triumphed over everything else.
When the waves resumed their awesome pulsing Carter knew that his terrible
request was granted. The BEING was telling him of the nighted gulfs through which he would have
to pass, of the unknown quintuple star in an unsuspected galaxy around which the alien world
revolved, and of the burrowing inner horrors against which the clawed, snouted race of that
world perpetually fought. IT told him, too, of how the angle of his personal consciousness-plane,
and the angle of his consciousness-plane regarding the space-time elements of the sought-for
world, would have to be tilted simultaneously in order to restore to that world the Carter-facet
which had dwelt there.
The PRESENCE warned him to be sure of his symbols if he wished ever to return
from the remote and alien world he had chosen, and he radiated back an impatient affirmation;
confident that the Silver Key, which he felt was with him and which he knew had tilted both
world and personal planes in throwing him back to 1883, contained those symbols which were meant.
And now the BEING, grasping his impatience, signified Its readiness to accomplish the monstrous
precipitation. The waves abruptly ceased, and there supervened a momentary stillness tense with
nameless and dreadful expectancy.
Then, without warning, came a whirring and drumming that swelled to a terrific
thundering. Once again Carter felt himself the focal point of an intense concentration of energy
which smote and hammered and seared unbearably in the now-familiar alien rhythm of outer space,
and which he could not classify as either the blasting heat of a blazing star or the all-petrifying
cold of the ultimate abyss. Bands and rays of colour utterly foreign to any spectrum of our
universe played and wove and interlaced before him, and he was conscious of a frightful velocity
of motion. He caught one fleeting glimpse of a figure sitting alone upon a cloudy throne
more hexagonal than otherwise. . . .
VI.

As the Hindoo paused in his story he saw that de Marigny and Phillips were watching him absorbedly.
Aspinwall pretended to ignore the narrative, and kept his eyes ostentatiously on the papers
before him. The alien-rhythmed ticking of the coffin-shaped clock took on a new and portentous
meaning, while the fumes from the choked, neglected tripods wove themselves into fantastic and
inexplicable shapes, and formed disturbing combinations with the grotesque figures of the
draught-swayed tapestries. The old negro who had tended them was gone—perhaps some growing
tension had frightened him out of the house. An almost apologetic hesitancy hampered the speaker
as he resumed in his oddly laboured yet idiomatic voice.
“You have found these things of the abyss hard to believe,” he
said, “but you will find the tangible and material things ahead still harder. That is
the way of our minds. Marvels are doubly incredible when brought into three dimensions from
the vague regions of possible dream. I shall not try to tell you much—that would be another
and very different story. I will tell only what you absolutely have to know.”
Carter, after that final vortex of alien and polychromatic rhythm, had found
himself in what for a moment he thought was his old insistent dream. He was, as many a night
before, walking amidst throngs of clawed, snouted beings through the streets of a labyrinth
of inexplicably fashioned metal under a blaze of diverse solar colour; and as he looked down
he saw that his body was like those of the others—rugose, partly squamous, and curiously
articulated in a fashion mainly insect-like yet not without a caricaturish resemblance to the
human outline. The Silver Key was still in his grasp—though held by a noxious-looking
claw.
In another moment the dream-sense vanished, and he felt rather as one just
awaked from a dream. The ultimate abyss—the BEING—an entity of absurd, outlandish
race called “Randolph Carter” on a world of the future not yet born—some of
these things were parts of the persistent, recurrent dreams of the wizard Zkauba on the planet
Yaddith. They were too persistent—they interfered with his duties in weaving spells to
keep the frightful bholes in their burrows, and became mixed up with his recollections of the
myriad real worlds he had visited in his light-beam envelope. And now they had become quasi-real
as never before. This heavy, material Silver Key in his right upper claw, exact image of one
he had dreamt about, meant no good. He must rest and reflect, and consult the Tablets of Nhing
for advice on what to do. Climbing a metal wall in a lane off the main concourse, he entered
his apartment and approached the rack of tablets.
Seven day-fractions later Zkauba squatted on his prism in awe and half-despair,
for the truth had opened up a new and conflicting set of memories. Nevermore could he know the
peace of being one entity. For all time and space he was two: Zkauba the Wizard of Yaddith,
disgusted with the thought of the repellent earth-mammal Carter that he was to be and had been,
and Randolph Carter, of Boston on the earth, shivering with fright at the clawed, snouted thing
which he had once been, and had become again.
The time-units spent on Yaddith, croaked the Swami—whose laboured voice
was beginning to shew signs of fatigue—made a tale in themselves which could not be related
in brief compass. There were trips to Shonhi and Mthura and Kath, and other worlds in the twenty-eight
galaxies accessible to the light-beam envelopes of the creatures of Yaddith, and trips back
and forth through aeons of time with the aid of the Silver Key and various other symbols known
to Yaddith’s wizards. There were hideous struggles with the bleached, viscous bholes in
the primal tunnels that honeycombed the planet. There were awed sessions in libraries amongst
the massed lore of ten thousand worlds living and dead. There were tense conferences with other
minds of Yaddith, including that of the Arch-Ancient Buo. Zkauba told no one of what had befallen
his personality, but when the Randolph Carter facet was uppermost he would study furiously every
possible means of returning to the earth and to human form, and would desperately practice human
speech with the buzzing, alien throat-organs so ill adapted to it.
The Carter-facet had soon learned with horror that the Silver Key was unable
to effect his return to human form. It was, as he deduced too late from things he remembered,
things he dreamed, and things he inferred from the lore of Yaddith, a product of Hyperborea
on earth; with power over the personal consciousness-angles of human beings alone. It could,
however, change the planetary angle and send the user at will through time in an unchanged
body. There had been an added spell which gave it limitless powers it otherwise lacked; but
this, too, was a human discovery—peculiar to a spatially unreachable region, and not to
be duplicated by the wizards of Yaddith. It had been written on the undecipherable parchment
in the hideously carven box with the Silver Key, and Carter bitterly lamented that he had left
it behind. The now inaccessible BEING of the abyss had warned him to be sure of his symbols,
and had doubtless thought he lacked nothing.
As time wore on he strove harder and harder to utilise the monstrous lore
of Yaddith in finding a way back to the abyss and the omnipotent ENTITY. With his new knowledge
he could have done much toward reading the cryptic parchment; but that power, under present
conditions, was merely ironic. There were times, however, when the Zkauba-facet was uppermost,
and when he strove to erase the conflicting Carter-memories which troubled him.
Thus long spaces of time wore on—ages longer than the brain of man could
grasp, since the beings of Yaddith die only after prolonged cycles. After many hundred revolutions
the Carter-facet seemed to gain on the Zkauba-facet, and would spend vast periods calculating
the distance of Yaddith in space and time from the human earth that was to be. The figures were
staggering—aeons of light-years beyond counting—but the immemorial lore of Yaddith
fitted Carter to grasp such things. He cultivated the power of dreaming himself momentarily
earthward, and learned many things about our planet that he had never known before. But he could
not dream the needed formula on the missing parchment.
Then at last he conceived a wild plan of escape from Yaddith—which began
when he found a drug that would keep his Zkauba-facet always dormant, yet without dissolution
of the knowledge and memories of Zkauba. He thought that his calculations would let him perform
a voyage with a light-wave envelope such as no being of Yaddith had ever performed—a
bodily voyage through nameless aeons and across incredible galactic reaches to the solar
system and the earth itself. Once on earth, though in the body of a clawed, snouted thing, he
might be able somehow to find—and finish deciphering—the strangely hieroglyphed
parchment he had left in the car at Arkham; and with its aid—and the Key’s—resume
his normal terrestrial semblance.
He was not blind to the perils of the attempt. He knew that when he had brought
the planet-angle to the right aeon (a thing impossible to do while hurtling through space),
Yaddith would be a dead world dominated by triumphant bholes, and that his escape in the light-wave
envelope would be a matter of grave doubt. Likewise was he aware of how he must achieve suspended
animation, in the manner of an adept, to endure the aeon-long flight through fathomless abysses.
He knew, too, that—assuming his voyage succeeded—he must immunise himself to the
bacterial and other earthly conditions hostile to a body from Yaddith. Furthermore, he must
provide a way of feigning human shape on earth until he might recover and decipher the parchment
and resume that shape in truth. Otherwise he would probably be discovered and destroyed by
the people in horror as a thing that should not be. And there must be some gold—luckily
obtainable on Yaddith—to tide him over that period of quest.
Slowly Carter’s plans went forward. He provided a light-wave envelope
of abnormal toughness, able to stand both the prodigious time-transition and the unexampled
flight through space. He tested all his calculations, and sent forth his earthward dreams again
and again, bringing them as close as possible to 1928. He practiced suspended animation with
marvellous success. He discovered just the bacterial agent he needed, and worked out the varying
gravity-stress to which he must become used. He artfully fashioned a waxen mask and loose costume
enabling him to pass among men as a human being of a sort, and devised a doubly potent spell
with which to hold back the bholes at the moment of his starting from the black, dead Yaddith
of the inconceivable future. He took care, too, to assemble a large supply of the drugs—unobtainable
on earth—which would keep his Zkauba-facet in abeyance till he might shed the Yaddith
body, nor did he neglect a small store of gold for earthly use.
The starting-day was a time of doubt and apprehension. Carter climbed up to
his envelope-platform, on the pretext of sailing for the triple star Nython, and crawled into
the sheath of shining metal. He had just room to perform the ritual of the Silver Key, and as
he did so he slowly started the levitation of his envelope. There was an appalling seething
and darkening of the day, and a hideous racking of pain. The cosmos seemed to reel irresponsibly,
and the other constellations danced in a black sky.
All at once Carter felt a new equilibrium. The cold of interstellar gulfs gnawed
at the outside of his envelope, and he could see that he floated free in space—the metal
building from which he had started having decayed ages before. Below him the ground was festering
with gigantic bholes; and even as he looked, one reared up several hundred feet and levelled
a bleached, viscous end at him. But his spells were effective, and in another moment he was
falling away from Yaddith unharmed.
VII.

In that bizarre room in New Orleans, from which the old black servant had instinctively fled,
the odd voice of Swami Chandraputra grew hoarser still.
“Gentlemen,” he continued, “I will not ask you to believe
these things until I have shewn you special proof. Accept it, then, as a myth, when I tell you
of the thousands of light-years—thousands of years of time, and uncounted billions
of miles—that Randolph Carter hurtled through space as a nameless, alien entity in
a thin envelope of electron-activated metal. He timed his period of suspended animation with
utmost care, planning to have it end only a few years before the time of landing on the earth
in or near 1928.
“He will never forget that awakening. Remember, gentlemen, that before
that aeon-long sleep he had lived consciously for thousands of terrestrial years amidst the
alien and horrible wonders of Yaddith. There was a hideous gnawing of cold, a cessation
of menacing dreams, and a glance through the eye-plates of the envelope. Stars, clusters, nebulae,
on every hand—and at last their outlines bore some kinship to the constellations of
earth that he knew.
“Some day his descent into the solar system may be told. He saw Kynarth
and Yuggoth on the rim, passed close to Neptune and glimpsed the hellish white fungi that spot
it, learned an untellable secret from the close-glimpsed mists of Jupiter and saw the horror
on one of the satellites, and gazed at the Cyclopean ruins that sprawl over Mars’ ruddy
disc. When the earth drew near he saw it as a thin crescent which swelled alarmingly in size.
He slackened speed, though his sensations of homecoming made him wish to lose not a moment.
I will not try to tell you of those sensations as I learned them from Carter.
“Well, toward the last Carter hovered about in the earth’s upper
air waiting till daylight came over the western hemisphere. He wanted to land where he had left—near
the Snake-Den in the hills behind Arkham. If any of you have been away from home long—and
I know one of you has—I leave it to you how the sight of New England’s rolling hills
and great elms and gnarled orchards and ancient stone walls must have affected him.
“He came down at dawn in the lower meadow of the old Carter place, and
was thankful for the silence and solitude. It was autumn, as when he had left, and the smell
of the hills was balm to his soul. He managed to drag the metal envelope up the slope of the
timber-lot into the Snake-Den, though it would not go through the weed-choked fissure to the
inner cave. It was there also that he covered his alien body with the human clothing and waxen
mask which would be necessary. He kept the envelope here for over a year, till certain circumstances
made a new hiding-place necessary.
“He walked to Arkham—incidentally practicing the management of
his body in human posture and against terrestrial gravity—and got his gold changed to
money at a bank. He also made some inquiries—posing as a foreigner ignorant of much English—and
found that the year was 1930, only two years after the goal he had aimed at.
“Of course, his position was horrible. Unable to assert his identity,
forced to live on guard every moment, with certain difficulties regarding food, and with a need
to conserve the alien drug which kept his Zkauba-facet dormant, he felt that he must act as
quickly as possible. Going to Boston and taking a room in the decaying West End, where he could
live cheaply and inconspicuously, he at once established inquiries concerning Randolph Carter’s
estate and effects. It was then that he learned how anxious Mr. Aspinwall, here, was to have
the estate divided, and how valiantly Mr. de Marigny and Mr. Phillips strove to keep it intact.”
The Hindoo bowed, though no expression crossed his dark, tranquil, and thickly
bearded face.
“Indirectly,” he continued, “Carter secured a good copy of
the missing parchment and began work on its deciphering. I am glad to say that I was able to
help in all this—for he appealed to me quite early, and through me came in touch with
other mystics throughout the world. I went to live with him in Boston—a wretched place
in Chambers St. As for the parchment—I am pleased to help Mr. de Marigny in his perplexity.
To him let me say that the language of those hieroglyphics is not Naacal but R’lyehian,
which was brought to earth by the spawn of Cthulhu countless cycles ago. It is, of course, a
translation—there was an Hyperborean original millions of years earlier in the primal
tongue of Tsath-yo.
“There was more to decipher than Carter had looked for, but at no time
did he give up hope. Early this year he made great strides through a book he imported from Nepal,
and there is no question but that he will win before long. Unfortunately, however, one handicap
has developed—the exhaustion of the alien drug which keeps the Zkauba-facet dormant. This
is not, however, as great a calamity as was feared. Carter’s personality is gaining in
the body, and when Zkauba comes uppermost—for shorter and shorter periods, and now only
when evoked by some unusual excitement—he is generally too dazed to undo any of Carter’s
work. He cannot find the metal envelope that would take him back to Yaddith, for although he
almost did, once, Carter hid it anew at a time when the Zkauba-facet was wholly latent. All
the harm he has done is to frighten a few people and create certain nightmare rumours among
the Poles and Lithuanians of Boston’s West End. So far, he has never injured the careful
disguise prepared by the Carter-facet, though he sometimes throws it off so that parts have
to be replaced. I have seen what lies beneath—and it is not good to see.
“A month ago Carter saw the advertisement of this meeting, and knew that
he must act quickly to save his estate. He could not wait to decipher the parchment and resume
his human form. Consequently he deputed me to act for him, and in that capacity I am here.
“Gentlemen, I say to you that Randolph Carter is not dead; that he is
temporarily in an anomalous condition, but that within two or three months at the outside he
will be able to appear in proper form and demand the custody of his estate. I am prepared to
offer proof if necessary. Therefore I beg that you adjourn this meeting for an indefinite period.”
VIII.

De Marigny and Phillips stared at the Hindoo as if hypnotised, while Aspinwall emitted a series
of snorts and bellows. The old attorney’s disgust had by now surged into open rage, and
he pounded the table with an apoplectically veined fist. When he spoke, it was in a kind of
bark.
“How long is this foolery to be borne? I’ve listened an hour to
this madman—this faker—and now he has the damned effrontery to say that Randolph
Carter is alive—to ask us to postpone the settlement for no good reason! Why don’t
you throw the scoundrel out, de Marigny? Do you mean to make us all the butts of a charlatan
or idiot?”
De Marigny quietly raised his hands and spoke softly.
“Let us think slowly and clearly. This has been a very singular tale,
and there are things in it which I, as a mystic not altogether ignorant, recognise as far from
impossible. Furthermore—since 1930 I have received letters from the Swami which tally
with his account.”
As he paused, old Mr. Phillips ventured a word.
“Swami Chandraputra spoke of proofs. I, too, recognise much that is significant
in this story, and I have myself had many oddly corroborative letters from the Swami during
the last two years; but some of these statements are very extreme. Is there not something tangible
which can be shewn?”
At last the impassive-faced Swami replied, slowly and hoarsely, and drawing
an object from the pocket of his loose coat as he spoke.
“While none of you here has ever seen the Silver Key itself, Messrs.
de Marigny and Phillips have seen photographs of it. Does this look familiar to you?”
He fumblingly laid on the table, with his large, white-mittened hand, a heavy
key of tarnished silver—nearly five inches long, of unknown and utterly exotic workmanship,
and covered from end to end with hieroglyphs of the most bizarre description. De Marigny and
Phillips gasped.
“That’s it!” cried de Marigny. “The camera doesn’t
lie. I couldn’t be mistaken!”
But Aspinwall had already launched a reply.
“Fools! What does it prove? If that’s really the key that belonged
to my cousin, it’s up to this foreigner—this damned nigger—to explain how
he got it! Randolph Carter vanished with the key four years ago. How do we know he wasn’t
robbed and murdered? He was half-crazy himself, and in touch with still crazier people.
“Look here, you nigger—where did you get that key? Did you kill
Randolph Carter?”
The Swami’s features, abnormally placid, did not change; but the remote,
irisless black eyes behind them blazed dangerously. He spoke with great difficulty.
“Please control yourself, Mr. Aspinwall. There is another form of proof
that I could give, but its effect upon everybody would not be pleasant. Let us be reasonable.
Here are some papers obviously written since 1930, and in the unmistakable style of Randolph
Carter.”
He clumsily drew a long envelope from inside his loose coat and handed it to
the sputtering attorney as de Marigny and Phillips watched with chaotic thoughts and a dawning
feeling of supernal wonder.
“Of course the handwriting is almost illegible—but remember that
Randolph Carter now has no hands well adapted to forming human script.”
Aspinwall looked through the papers hurriedly, and was visibly perplexed, but
he did not change his demeanour. The room was tense with excitement and nameless dread, and
the alien rhythm of the coffin-shaped clock had an utterly diabolic sound to de Marigny and
Phillips—though the lawyer seemed affected not at all. Aspinwall spoke again.
“These look like clever forgeries. If they aren’t, they may mean
that Randolph Carter has been brought under the control of people with no good purpose. There’s
only one thing to do—have this faker arrested. De Marigny, will you telephone for the
police?”
“Let us wait,” answered their host. “I do not think this
case calls for the police. I have a certain idea. Mr. Aspinwall, this gentleman is a mystic
of real attainments. He says he is in the confidence of Randolph Carter. Will it satisfy you
if he can answer certain questions which could be answered only by one in such confidence? I
know Carter, and can ask such questions. Let me get a book which I think will make a good test.”
He turned toward the door to the library, Phillips dazedly following in a
kind of automatic way. Aspinwall remained where he was, studying closely the Hindoo who confronted
him with abnormally impassive face. Suddenly, as Chandraputra clumsily restored the Silver
Key to his pocket, the lawyer emitted a guttural shout which stopped de Marigny and Phillips
in their tracks.
“Hey, by God, I’ve got it! This rascal is in disguise. I don’t
believe he’s an East Indian at all. That face—it isn’t a face, but a mask!
I guess his story put that into my head, but it’s true. It never moves, and that turban
and beard hide the edges. This fellow’s a common crook! He isn’t even a foreigner—I’ve
been watching his language. He’s a Yankee of some sort. And look at those mittens—he
knows his fingerprints could be spotted. Damn you, I’ll pull that thing off—”
“Stop!” The hoarse, oddly alien voice of the Swami held a tone
beyond all mere earthly fright. “I told you there was another form of proof which I
could give if necessary, and I warned you not to provoke me to it. This red-faced old meddler
is right—I’m not really an East Indian. This face is a mask, and what it covers
is not human. You others have guessed—I felt that minutes ago. It wouldn’t be
pleasant if I took that mask off—let it alone, Ernest. I may as well tell you that 
I am Randolph Carter.”
No one moved. Aspinwall snorted and made vague motions. De Marigny and Phillips,
across the room, watched the workings of his red face and studied the back of the turbaned figure
that confronted him. The clock’s abnormal ticking was hideous, and the tripod fumes and
swaying arras danced a dance of death. The half-choking lawyer broke the silence.
“No you don’t, you crook—you can’t scare me! You’ve
reasons of your own for not wanting that mask off. Maybe we’d know who you are. Off with
it—”
As he reached forward, the Swami seized his hand with one of his own clumsily
mittened members, evoking a curious cry of mixed pain and surprise. De Marigny started toward
the two, but paused confused as the pseudo-Hindoo’s shout of protest changed to a wholly
inexplicable rattling and buzzing sound. Aspinwall’s red face was furious, and with his
free hand he made another lunge at his opponent’s bushy beard. This time he succeeded
in getting a hold, and at his frantic tug the whole waxen visage came loose from the turban
and clung to the lawyer’s apoplectic fist.
As it did so, Aspinwall uttered a frightful gurgling cry, and Phillips and
de Marigny saw his face convulsed with a wilder, deeper, and more hideous epilepsy of stark
panic than ever they had seen on human countenance before. The pseudo-Swami had meanwhile released
his other hand and was standing as if dazed, making buzzing noises of a most abnormal quality.
Then the turbaned figure slumped oddly into a posture scarcely human, and began a curious, fascinated
sort of shuffle toward the coffin-shaped clock that ticked out its cosmic and abnormal rhythm.
His now uncovered face was turned away, and de Marigny and Phillips could not see what the
lawyer’s act had disclosed. Then their attention was turned to Aspinwall, who was sinking
ponderously to the floor. The spell was broken—but when they reached the old man he was
dead.
Turning quickly to the shuffling Swami’s receding back, de Marigny saw
one of the great white mittens drop listlessly off a dangling arm. The fumes of the olibanum
were thick, and all that could be glimpsed of the revealed hand was something long and black.
Before the Creole could reach the retreating figure, old Mr. Phillips laid a restraining hand
on his shoulder.
“Don’t!” he whispered. “We don’t know what we’re
up against—that other facet, you know—Zkauba, the wizard of Yaddith. . . .”
The turbaned figure had now reached the abnormal clock, and the watchers saw
through the dense fumes a blurred black claw fumbling with the tall, hieroglyphed door. The
fumbling made a queer clicking sound. Then the figure entered the coffin-shaped case and pulled
the door shut after it.
De Marigny could no longer be restrained, but when he reached and opened the
clock it was empty. The abnormal ticking went on, beating out the dark cosmic rhythm which underlies
all mystical gate-openings. On the floor the great white mitten, and the dead man with a bearded
mask clutched in his hand, had nothing further to reveal.


A year has passed, and nothing has been heard of Randolph Carter. His estate is still unsettled.
The Boston address from which one “Swami Chandraputra” sent inquiries to various
mystics in 1930–31–32 was indeed tenanted by a strange Hindoo, but he left shortly
before the date of the New Orleans conference and has never been seen since. He was said to
be dark, expressionless, and bearded, and his landlord thinks the swarthy mask—which was
duly exhibited—looks very much like him. He was never, however, suspected of any connexion
with the nightmare apparitions whispered of by local Slavs. The hills behind Arkham were searched
for the “metal envelope”, but nothing of the sort was ever found. However, a clerk
in Arkham’s First National Bank does recall a queer turbaned man who cashed an odd bit
of gold bullion in October, 1930.
De Marigny and Phillips scarcely know what to make of the business. After
all, what was proved? There was a story. There was a key which might have been forged from one
of the pictures Carter had freely distributed in 1928. There were papers—all indecisive.
There was a masked stranger, but who now living saw behind the mask? Amidst the strain and the
olibanum fumes that act of vanishing in the clock might easily have been a dual hallucination.
Hindoos know much of hypnotism. Reason proclaims the “Swami” a criminal with designs
on Randolph Carter’s estate. But the autopsy said that Aspinwall had died of shock. Was
it rage alone which caused it? And some things in that story . . .
In a vast room hung with strangely figured arras and filled with olibanum fumes,
Etienne-Laurent de Marigny often sits listening with vague sensations to the abnormal rhythm
of that hieroglyphed, coffin-shaped clock.


The Temple

(Manuscript found on the coast of Yucatan.)

On August 20, 1917, I, Karl Heinrich, Graf von Altberg-Ehrenstein, Lieutenant-Commander in the
Imperial German Navy and in charge of the submarine U-29, deposit this bottle and record in
the Atlantic Ocean at a point to me unknown but probably about N. Latitude 20°, W. Longitude
35°, where my ship lies disabled on the ocean floor. I do so because of my desire to set
certain unusual facts before the public; a thing I shall not in all probability survive to accomplish
in person, since the circumstances surrounding me are as menacing as they are extraordinary,
and involve not only the hopeless crippling of the U-29, but the impairment of my iron German
will in a manner most disastrous.
On the afternoon of June 18, as reported by wireless to the U-61, bound for
Kiel, we torpedoed the British freighter Victory, New York to Liverpool, in N. Latitude
45° 16′, W. Longitude 28° 34′; permitting the crew to leave in boats in order
to obtain a good cinema view for the admiralty records. The ship sank quite picturesquely, bow
first, the stern rising high out of the water whilst the hull shot down perpendicularly to the
bottom of the sea. Our camera missed nothing, and I regret that so fine a reel of film should never
reach Berlin. After that we sank the lifeboats with our guns and submerged.
When we rose to the surface about sunset a seaman’s body was found on
the deck, hands gripping the railing in curious fashion. The poor fellow was young, rather dark,
and very handsome; probably an Italian or Greek, and undoubtedly of the Victory’s
crew. He had evidently sought refuge on the very ship which had been forced to destroy his own—one
more victim of the unjust war of aggression which the English pig-dogs are waging upon the Fatherland.
Our men searched him for souvenirs, and found in his coat pocket a very odd bit of ivory carved
to represent a youth’s head crowned with laurel. My fellow-officer, Lieut. Klenze, believed
that the thing was of great age and artistic value, so took it from the men for himself. How
it had ever come into the possession of a common sailor, neither he nor I could imagine.
As the dead man was thrown overboard there occurred two incidents which created
much disturbance amongst the crew. The fellow’s eyes had been closed; but in the dragging
of his body to the rail they were jarred open, and many seemed to entertain a queer delusion
that they gazed steadily and mockingly at Schmidt and Zimmer, who were bent over the corpse.
The Boatswain Müller, an elderly man who would have known better had he not been a superstitious
Alsatian swine, became so excited by this impression that he watched the body in the water;
and swore that after it sank a little it drew its limbs into a swimming position and sped away
to the south under the waves. Klenze and I did not like these displays of peasant ignorance,
and severely reprimanded the men, particularly Müller.
The next day a very troublesome situation was created by the indisposition
of some of the crew. They were evidently suffering from the nervous strain of our long voyage,
and had had bad dreams. Several seemed quite dazed and stupid; and after satisfying myself that
they were not feigning their weakness, I excused them from their duties. The sea was rather
rough, so we descended to a depth where the waves were less troublesome. Here we were comparatively
calm, despite a somewhat puzzling southward current which we could not identify from our oceanographic
charts. The moans of the sick men were decidedly annoying; but since they did not appear to
demoralise the rest of the crew, we did not resort to extreme measures. It was our plan to remain
where we were and intercept the liner Dacia, mentioned in information from agents
in New York.
In the early evening we rose to the surface, and found the sea less heavy.
The smoke of a battleship was on the northern horizon, but our distance and ability to submerge
made us safe. What worried us more was the talk of Boatswain Müller, which grew wilder
as night came on. He was in a detestably childish state, and babbled of some illusion of dead
bodies drifting past the undersea portholes; bodies which looked at him intensely, and which
he recognised in spite of bloating as having seen dying during some of our victorious German
exploits. And he said that the young man we had found and tossed overboard was their leader.
This was very gruesome and abnormal, so we confined Müller in irons and had him soundly
whipped. The men were not pleased at his punishment, but discipline was necessary. We also denied
the request of a delegation headed by Seaman Zimmer, that the curious carved ivory head be cast
into the sea.
On June 20, Seamen Bohm and Schmidt, who had been ill the day before, became
violently insane. I regretted that no physician was included in our complement of officers,
since German lives are precious; but the constant ravings of the two concerning a terrible curse
were most subversive of discipline, so drastic steps were taken. The crew accepted the event
in a sullen fashion, but it seemed to quiet Müller; who thereafter gave us no trouble.
In the evening we released him, and he went about his duties silently.
In the week that followed we were all very nervous, watching for the Dacia.
The tension was aggravated by the disappearance of Müller and Zimmer, who undoubtedly committed
suicide as a result of the fears which had seemed to harass them, though they were not observed
in the act of jumping overboard. I was rather glad to be rid of Müller, for even his silence
had unfavourably affected the crew. Everyone seemed inclined to be silent now, as though holding
a secret fear. Many were ill, but none made a disturbance. Lieut. Klenze chafed under the strain,
and was annoyed by the merest trifles—such as the school of dolphins which gathered about
the U-29 in increasing numbers, and the growing intensity of that southward current which was
not on our chart.
It at length became apparent that we had missed the Dacia altogether.
Such failures are not uncommon, and we were more pleased than disappointed; since our return
to Wilhelmshaven was now in order. At noon June 28 we turned northeastward, and despite some
rather comical entanglements with the unusual masses of dolphins were soon under way.
The explosion in the engine room at 2 P.M. was wholly a surprise. No defect
in the machinery or carelessness in the men had been noticed, yet without warning the ship was
racked from end to end with a colossal shock. Lieut. Klenze hurried to the engine room, finding
the fuel-tank and most of the mechanism shattered, and Engineers Raabe and Schneider instantly
killed. Our situation had suddenly become grave indeed; for though the chemical air regenerators
were intact, and though we could use the devices for raising and submerging the ship and opening
the hatches as long as compressed air and storage batteries might hold out, we were powerless
to propel or guide the submarine. To seek rescue in the lifeboats would be to deliver ourselves
into the hands of enemies unreasonably embittered against our great German nation, and our wireless
had failed ever since the Victory affair to put us in touch with a fellow U-boat of the
Imperial Navy.
From the hour of the accident till July 2 we drifted constantly to the south,
almost without plans and encountering no vessel. Dolphins still encircled the U-29, a somewhat
remarkable circumstance considering the distance we had covered. On the morning of July 2 we
sighted a warship flying American colours, and the men became very restless in their desire
to surrender. Finally Lieut. Klenze had to shoot a seaman named Traube, who urged this un-German
act with especial violence. This quieted the crew for the time, and we submerged unseen.
The next afternoon a dense flock of sea-birds appeared from the south, and
the ocean began to heave ominously. Closing our hatches, we awaited developments until we realised
that we must either submerge or be swamped in the mounting waves. Our air pressure and electricity
were diminishing, and we wished to avoid all unnecessary use of our slender mechanical resources;
but in this case there was no choice. We did not descend far, and when after several hours the
sea was calmer, we decided to return to the surface. Here, however, a new trouble developed;
for the ship failed to respond to our direction in spite of all that the mechanics could do.
As the men grew more frightened at this undersea imprisonment, some of them began to mutter
again about Lieut. Klenze’s ivory image, but the sight of an automatic pistol calmed them.
We kept the poor devils as busy as we could, tinkering at the machinery even when we knew it
was useless.
Klenze and I usually slept at different times; and it was during my sleep,
about 5 A.M., July 4, that the general mutiny broke loose. The six remaining pigs of seamen,
suspecting that we were lost, had suddenly burst into a mad fury at our refusal to surrender
to the Yankee battleship two days before; and were in a delirium of cursing and destruction.
They roared like the animals they were, and broke instruments and furniture indiscriminately;
screaming about such nonsense as the curse of the ivory image and the dark dead youth who looked
at them and swam away. Lieut. Klenze seemed paralysed and inefficient, as one might expect of
a soft, womanish Rhinelander. I shot all six men, for it was necessary, and made sure that none
remained alive.
We expelled the bodies through the double hatches and were alone in the U-29.
Klenze seemed very nervous, and drank heavily. It was decided that we remain alive as long as
possible, using the large stock of provisions and chemical supply of oxygen, none of which had
suffered from the crazy antics of those swine-hound seamen. Our compasses, depth gauges, and
other delicate instruments were ruined; so that henceforth our only reckoning would be guesswork,
based on our watches, the calendar, and our apparent drift as judged by any objects we might
spy through the portholes or from the conning tower. Fortunately we had storage batteries still
capable of long use, both for interior lighting and for the searchlight. We often cast a beam
around the ship, but saw only dolphins, swimming parallel to our own drifting course. I was
scientifically interested in those dolphins; for though the ordinary Delphinus delphis
is a cetacean mammal, unable to subsist without air, I watched one of the swimmers closely for
two hours, and did not see him alter his submerged condition.
With the passage of time Klenze and I decided that we were still drifting south,
meanwhile sinking deeper and deeper. We noted the marine fauna and flora, and read much on the
subject in the books I had carried with me for spare moments. I could not help observing, however,
the inferior scientific knowledge of my companion. His mind was not Prussian, but given to imaginings
and speculations which have no value. The fact of our coming death affected him curiously, and
he would frequently pray in remorse over the men, women, and children we had sent to the bottom;
forgetting that all things are noble which serve the German state. After a time he became noticeably
unbalanced, gazing for hours at his ivory image and weaving fanciful stories of the lost and
forgotten things under the sea. Sometimes, as a psychological experiment, I would lead him on
in these wanderings, and listen to his endless poetical quotations and tales of sunken ships.
I was very sorry for him, for I dislike to see a German suffer; but he was not a good man to
die with. For myself I was proud, knowing how the Fatherland would revere my memory and how
my sons would be taught to be men like me.
On August 9, we espied the ocean floor, and sent a powerful beam from the searchlight
over it. It was a vast undulating plain, mostly covered with seaweed, and strown with the shells
of small molluscs. Here and there were slimy objects of puzzling contour, draped with weeds
and encrusted with barnacles, which Klenze declared must be ancient ships lying in their graves.
He was puzzled by one thing, a peak of solid matter, protruding above the ocean bed nearly four
feet at its apex; about two feet thick, with flat sides and smooth upper surfaces which met
at a very obtuse angle. I called the peak a bit of outcropping rock, but Klenze thought he saw
carvings on it. After a while he began to shudder, and turned away from the scene as if frightened;
yet could give no explanation save that he was overcome with the vastness, darkness, remoteness,
antiquity, and mystery of the oceanic abysses. His mind was tired, but I am always a German,
and was quick to notice two things; that the U-29 was standing the deep-sea pressure splendidly,
and that the peculiar dolphins were still about us, even at a depth where the existence of high
organisms is considered impossible by most naturalists. That I had previously overestimated
our depth, I was sure; but none the less we must still be deep enough to make these phenomena
remarkable. Our southward speed, as gauged by the ocean floor, was about as I had estimated
from the organisms passed at higher levels.
It was at 3:15 P.M., August 12, that poor Klenze went wholly mad. He had been
in the conning tower using the searchlight when I saw him bound into the library compartment
where I sat reading, and his face at once betrayed him. I will repeat here what he said, underlining
the words he emphasised: “He is calling! He is calling! I
hear him! We must go!” As he spoke he took his ivory image from the table, pocketed it,
and seized my arm in an effort to drag me up the companionway to the deck. In a moment I understood
that he meant to open the hatch and plunge with me into the water outside, a vagary of suicidal
and homicidal mania for which I was scarcely prepared. As I hung back and attempted to soothe
him he grew more violent, saying: “Come now—do not wait until later; it is better
to repent and be forgiven than to defy and be condemned.” Then I tried the opposite of
the soothing plan, and told him he was mad—pitifully demented. But he was unmoved, and
cried: “If I am mad, it is mercy! May the gods pity the man who in his callousness can
remain sane to the hideous end! Come and be mad whilst he still calls with mercy!”
This outburst seemed to relieve a pressure in his brain; for as he finished
he grew much milder, asking me to let him depart alone if I would not accompany him. My course
at once became clear. He was a German, but only a Rhinelander and a commoner; and he was now
a potentially dangerous madman. By complying with his suicidal request I could immediately free
myself from one who was no longer a companion but a menace. I asked him to give me the ivory
image before he went, but this request brought from him such uncanny laughter that I did not
repeat it. Then I asked him if he wished to leave any keepsake or lock of hair for his family
in Germany in case I should be rescued, but again he gave me that strange laugh. So as he climbed
the ladder I went to the levers, and allowing proper time-intervals operated the machinery which
sent him to his death. After I saw that he was no longer in the boat I threw the searchlight
around the water in an effort to obtain a last glimpse of him; since I wished to ascertain whether
the water-pressure would flatten him as it theoretically should, or whether the body would be
unaffected, like those extraordinary dolphins. I did not, however, succeed in finding my late
companion, for the dolphins were massed thickly and obscuringly about the conning tower.
That evening I regretted that I had not taken the ivory image surreptitiously
from poor Klenze’s pocket as he left, for the memory of it fascinated me. I could not
forget the youthful, beautiful head with its leafy crown, though I am not by nature an artist.
I was also sorry that I had no one with whom to converse. Klenze, though not my mental equal,
was much better than no one. I did not sleep well that night, and wondered exactly when the
end would come. Surely, I had little enough chance of rescue.
The next day I ascended to the conning tower and commenced the customary searchlight
explorations. Northward the view was much the same as it had been all the four days since we
had sighted the bottom, but I perceived that the drifting of the U-29 was less rapid. As I swung
the beam around to the south, I noticed that the ocean floor ahead fell away in a marked declivity,
and bore curiously regular blocks of stone in certain places, disposed as if in accordance with
definite patterns. The boat did not at once descend to match the greater ocean depth, so I was
soon forced to adjust the searchlight to cast a sharply downward beam. Owing to the abruptness
of the change a wire was disconnected, which necessitated a delay of many minutes for repairs;
but at length the light streamed on again, flooding the marine valley below me.
I am not given to emotion of any kind, but my amazement was very great when
I saw what lay revealed in that electrical glow. And yet as one reared in the best Kultur
of Prussia I should not have been amazed, for geology and tradition alike tell us of great transpositions
in oceanic and continental areas. What I saw was an extended and elaborate array of ruined edifices;
all of magnificent though unclassified architecture, and in various stages of preservation.
Most appeared to be of marble, gleaming whitely in the rays of the searchlight, and the general
plan was of a large city at the bottom of a narrow valley, with numerous isolated temples and
villas on the steep slopes above. Roofs were fallen and columns were broken, but there still
remained an air of immemorially ancient splendour which nothing could efface.
Confronted at last with the Atlantis I had formerly deemed largely a myth,
I was the most eager of explorers. At the bottom of that valley a river once had flowed; for
as I examined the scene more closely I beheld the remains of stone and marble bridges and sea-walls,
and terraces and embankments once verdant and beautiful. In my enthusiasm I became nearly as
idiotic and sentimental as poor Klenze, and was very tardy in noticing that the southward current
had ceased at last, allowing the U-29 to settle slowly down upon the sunken city as an aëroplane
settles upon a town of the upper earth. I was slow, too, in realising that the school of unusual
dolphins had vanished.
In about two hours the boat rested in a paved plaza close to the rocky wall
of the valley. On one side I could view the entire city as it sloped from the plaza down to
the old river-bank; on the other side, in startling proximity, I was confronted by the richly
ornate and perfectly preserved facade of a great building, evidently a temple, hollowed from
the solid rock. Of the original workmanship of this titanic thing I can only make conjectures.
The facade, of immense magnitude, apparently covers a continuous hollow recess; for its windows
are many and widely distributed. In the centre yawns a great open door, reached by an impressive
flight of steps, and surrounded by exquisite carvings like the figures of Bacchanals in relief.
Foremost of all are the great columns and frieze, both decorated with sculptures of inexpressible
beauty; obviously portraying idealised pastoral scenes and processions of priests and priestesses
bearing strange ceremonial devices in adoration of a radiant god. The art is of the most phenomenal
perfection, largely Hellenic in idea, yet strangely individual. It imparts an impression of
terrible antiquity, as though it were the remotest rather than the immediate ancestor of Greek
art. Nor can I doubt that every detail of this massive product was fashioned from the virgin
hillside rock of our planet. It is palpably a part of the valley wall, though how the vast interior
was ever excavated I cannot imagine. Perhaps a cavern or series of caverns furnished the nucleus.
Neither age nor submersion has corroded the pristine grandeur of this awful fane—for fane
indeed it must be—and today after thousands of years it rests untarnished and inviolate
in the endless night and silence of an ocean chasm.
I cannot reckon the number of hours I spent in gazing at the sunken city with
its buildings, arches, statues, and bridges, and the colossal temple with its beauty and mystery.
Though I knew that death was near, my curiosity was consuming; and I threw the searchlight’s
beam about in eager quest. The shaft of light permitted me to learn many details, but refused
to shew anything within the gaping door of the rock-hewn temple; and after a time I turned off
the current, conscious of the need of conserving power. The rays were now perceptibly dimmer
than they had been during the weeks of drifting. And as if sharpened by the coming deprivation
of light, my desire to explore the watery secrets grew. I, a German, should be the first to
tread those aeon-forgotten ways!
I produced and examined a deep-sea diving suit of joined metal, and experimented
with the portable light and air regenerator. Though I should have trouble in managing the double
hatches alone, I believed I could overcome all obstacles with my scientific skill and actually
walk about the dead city in person.
On August 16 I effected an exit from the U-29, and laboriously made my way
through the ruined and mud-choked streets to the ancient river. I found no skeletons or other
human remains, but gleaned a wealth of archaeological lore from sculptures and coins. Of this
I cannot now speak save to utter my awe at a culture in the full noon of glory when cave-dwellers
roamed Europe and the Nile flowed unwatched to the sea. Others, guided by this manuscript if
it shall ever be found, must unfold the mysteries at which I can only hint. I returned to the
boat as my electric batteries grew feeble, resolved to explore the rock temple on the following
day.
On the 17th, as my impulse to search out the mystery of the temple waxed still
more insistent, a great disappointment befell me; for I found that the materials needed to replenish
the portable light had perished in the mutiny of those pigs in July. My rage was unbounded,
yet my German sense forbade me to venture unprepared into an utterly black interior which might
prove the lair of some indescribable marine monster or a labyrinth of passages from whose windings
I could never extricate myself. All I could do was to turn on the waning searchlight of the
U-29, and with its aid walk up the temple steps and study the exterior carvings. The shaft of
light entered the door at an upward angle, and I peered in to see if I could glimpse anything,
but all in vain. Not even the roof was visible; and though I took a step or two inside after
testing the floor with a staff, I dared not go farther. Moreover, for the first time in my life
I experienced the emotion of dread. I began to realise how some of poor Klenze’s moods
had arisen, for as the temple drew me more and more, I feared its aqueous abysses with a blind
and mounting terror. Returning to the submarine, I turned off the lights and sat thinking in
the dark. Electricity must now be saved for emergencies.
Saturday the 18th I spent in total darkness, tormented by thoughts and memories
that threatened to overcome my German will. Klenze had gone mad and perished before reaching
this sinister remnant of a past unwholesomely remote, and had advised me to go with him. Was,
indeed, Fate preserving my reason only to draw me irresistibly to an end more horrible and unthinkable
than any man has dreamed of? Clearly, my nerves were sorely taxed, and I must cast off these
impressions of weaker men.
I could not sleep Saturday night, and turned on the lights regardless of the
future. It was annoying that the electricity should not last out the air and provisions. I revived
my thoughts of euthanasia, and examined my automatic pistol. Toward morning I must have dropped
asleep with the lights on, for I awoke in darkness yesterday afternoon to find the batteries
dead. I struck several matches in succession, and desperately regretted the improvidence which
had caused us long ago to use up the few candles we carried.
After the fading of the last match I dared to waste, I sat very quietly without
a light. As I considered the inevitable end my mind ran over preceding events, and developed
a hitherto dormant impression which would have caused a weaker and more superstitious man to
shudder. The head of the radiant god in the sculptures on the rock temple is the same as
that carven bit of ivory which the dead sailor brought from the sea and which poor Klenze carried
back into the sea.
I was a little dazed by this coincidence, but did not become terrified. It
is only the inferior thinker who hastens to explain the singular and the complex by the primitive
short cut of supernaturalism. The coincidence was strange, but I was too sound a reasoner to
connect circumstances which admit of no logical connexion, or to associate in any uncanny fashion
the disastrous events which had led from the Victory affair to my present plight. Feeling
the need of more rest, I took a sedative and secured some more sleep. My nervous condition was
reflected in my dreams, for I seemed to hear the cries of drowning persons, and to see dead
faces pressing against the portholes of the boat. And among the dead faces was the living, mocking
face of the youth with the ivory image.
I must be careful how I record my awaking today, for I am unstrung, and much
hallucination is necessarily mixed with fact. Psychologically my case is most interesting, and
I regret that it cannot be observed scientifically by a competent German authority. Upon opening
my eyes my first sensation was an overmastering desire to visit the rock temple; a desire which
grew every instant, yet which I automatically sought to resist through some emotion of fear
which operated in the reverse direction. Next there came to me the impression of light
amidst the darkness of dead batteries, and I seemed to see a sort of phosphorescent glow in
the water through the porthole which opened toward the temple. This aroused my curiosity, for
I knew of no deep-sea organism capable of emitting such luminosity. But before I could investigate
there came a third impression which because of its irrationality caused me to doubt the objectivity
of anything my senses might record. It was an aural delusion; a sensation of rhythmic, melodic
sound as of some wild yet beautiful chant or choral hymn, coming from the outside through the
absolutely sound-proof hull of the U-29. Convinced of my psychological and nervous abnormality,
I lighted some matches and poured a stiff dose of sodium bromide solution, which seemed to calm
me to the extent of dispelling the illusion of sound. But the phosphorescence remained, and
I had difficulty in repressing a childish impulse to go to the porthole and seek its source.
It was horribly realistic, and I could soon distinguish by its aid the familiar objects around
me, as well as the empty sodium bromide glass of which I had had no former visual impression
in its present location. The last circumstance made me ponder, and I crossed the room and touched
the glass. It was indeed in the place where I had seemed to see it. Now I knew that the light
was either real or part of an hallucination so fixed and consistent that I could not hope to
dispel it, so abandoning all resistance I ascended to the conning tower to look for the luminous
agency. Might it not actually be another U-boat, offering possibilities of rescue?
It is well that the reader accept nothing which follows as objective truth,
for since the events transcend natural law, they are necessarily the subjective and unreal creations
of my overtaxed mind. When I attained the conning tower I found the sea in general far less
luminous than I had expected. There was no animal or vegetable phosphorescence about, and the
city that sloped down to the river was invisible in blackness. What I did see was not spectacular,
not grotesque or terrifying, yet it removed my last vestige of trust in my consciousness. 
For the door and windows of the undersea temple hewn from the rocky hill were vividly aglow
with a flickering radiance, as from a mighty altar-flame far within.
Later incidents are chaotic. As I stared at the uncannily lighted door and
windows, I became subject to the most extravagant visions—visions so extravagant that
I cannot even relate them. I fancied that I discerned objects in the temple—objects both
stationary and moving—and seemed to hear again the unreal chant that had floated to me
when first I awaked. And over all rose thoughts and fears which centred in the youth from the
sea and the ivory image whose carving was duplicated on the frieze and columns of the temple
before me. I thought of poor Klenze, and wondered where his body rested with the image he had
carried back into the sea. He had warned me of something, and I had not heeded—but he
was a soft-headed Rhinelander who went mad at troubles a Prussian could bear with ease.
The rest is very simple. My impulse to visit and enter the temple has now become
an inexplicable and imperious command which ultimately cannot be denied. My own German will
no longer controls my acts, and volition is henceforward possible only in minor matters. Such
madness it was which drove Klenze to his death, bareheaded and unprotected in the ocean; but
I am a Prussian and a man of sense, and will use to the last what little will I have. When first
I saw that I must go, I prepared my diving suit, helmet, and air regenerator for instant donning;
and immediately commenced to write this hurried chronicle in the hope that it may some day reach
the world. I shall seal the manuscript in a bottle and entrust it to the sea as I leave the
U-29 forever.
I have no fear, not even from the prophecies of the madman Klenze. What I have
seen cannot be true, and I know that this madness of my own will at most lead only to suffocation
when my air is gone. The light in the temple is a sheer delusion, and I shall die calmly, like
a German, in the black and forgotten depths. This daemoniac laughter which I hear as I write
comes only from my own weakening brain. So I will carefully don my diving suit and walk boldly
up the steps into that primal shrine; that silent secret of unfathomed waters and uncounted
years.


Beyond the Wall of Sleep





“I have an exposition of sleep come upon me.”
—Shakespeare.







I have frequently wondered if the majority of mankind ever pause to reflect upon the occasionally
titanic significance of dreams, and of the obscure world to which they belong. Whilst the greater
number of our nocturnal visions are perhaps no more than faint and fantastic reflections of
our waking experiences—Freud to the contrary with his puerile symbolism—there are
still a certain remainder whose immundane and ethereal character permits of no ordinary interpretation,
and whose vaguely exciting and disquieting effect suggests possible minute glimpses into a sphere
of mental existence no less important than physical life, yet separated from that life by an
all but impassable barrier. From my experience I cannot doubt but that man, when lost to terrestrial
consciousness, is indeed sojourning in another and uncorporeal life of far different nature
from the life we know; and of which only the slightest and most indistinct memories linger after
waking. From those blurred and fragmentary memories we may infer much, yet prove little. We
may guess that in dreams life, matter, and vitality, as the earth knows such things, are not
necessarily constant; and that time and space do not exist as our waking selves comprehend them.
Sometimes I believe that this less material life is our truer life, and that our vain presence
on the terraqueous globe is itself the secondary or merely virtual phenomenon.
It was from a youthful reverie filled with speculations of this sort that I
arose one afternoon in the winter of 1900–1901, when to the state psychopathic institution
in which I served as an interne was brought the man whose case has ever since haunted me so
unceasingly. His name, as given on the records, was Joe Slater, or Slaader, and his appearance
was that of the typical denizen of the Catskill Mountain region; one of those strange, repellent
scions of a primitive colonial peasant stock whose isolation for nearly three centuries in the
hilly fastnesses of a little-travelled countryside has caused them to sink to a kind of barbaric
degeneracy, rather than advance with their more fortunately placed brethren of the thickly settled
districts. Among these odd folk, who correspond exactly to the decadent element of “white
trash” in the South, law and morals are non-existent; and their general mental status
is probably below that of any other section of the native American people.
Joe Slater, who came to the institution in the vigilant custody of four state
policemen, and who was described as a highly dangerous character, certainly presented no evidence
of his perilous disposition when first I beheld him. Though well above the middle stature, and
of somewhat brawny frame, he was given an absurd appearance of harmless stupidity by the pale,
sleepy blueness of his small watery eyes, the scantiness of his neglected and never-shaven growth
of yellow beard, and the listless drooping of his heavy nether lip. His age was unknown, since
among his kind neither family records nor permanent family ties exist; but from the baldness
of his head in front, and from the decayed condition of his teeth, the head surgeon wrote him
down as a man of about forty.
From the medical and court documents we learned all that could be gathered
of his case. This man, a vagabond, hunter, and trapper, had always been strange in the eyes
of his primitive associates. He had habitually slept at night beyond the ordinary time, and
upon waking would often talk of unknown things in a manner so bizarre as to inspire fear even
in the hearts of an unimaginative populace. Not that his form of language was at all unusual,
for he never spoke save in the debased patois of his environment; but the tone and tenor of
his utterances were of such mysterious wildness, that none might listen without apprehension.
He himself was generally as terrified and baffled as his auditors, and within an hour after
awakening would forget all that he had said, or at least all that had caused him to say what
he did; relapsing into a bovine, half-amiable normality like that of the other hill-dwellers.
As Slater grew older, it appeared, his matutinal aberrations had gradually
increased in frequency and violence; till about a month before his arrival at the institution
had occurred the shocking tragedy which caused his arrest by the authorities. One day near noon,
after a profound sleep begun in a whiskey debauch at about five of the previous afternoon, the
man had roused himself most suddenly; with ululations so horrible and unearthly that they brought
several neighbours to his cabin—a filthy sty where he dwelt with a family as indescribable
as himself. Rushing out into the snow, he had flung his arms aloft and commenced a series of
leaps directly upward in the air; the while shouting his determination to reach some ‘big,
big cabin with brightness in the roof and walls and floor, and the loud queer music far away’.
As two men of moderate size sought to restrain him, he had struggled with maniacal force and
fury, screaming of his desire and need to find and kill a certain ‘thing that shines and
shakes and laughs’. At length, after temporarily felling one of his detainers with a sudden
blow, he had flung himself upon the other in a daemoniac ecstasy of bloodthirstiness, shrieking
fiendishly that he would ‘jump high in the air and burn his way through anything that
stopped him’. Family and neighbours had now fled in a panic, and when the more courageous
of them returned, Slater was gone, leaving behind an unrecognisable pulp-like thing that had
been a living man but an hour before. None of the mountaineers had dared to pursue him, and
it is likely that they would have welcomed his death from the cold; but when several mornings
later they heard his screams from a distant ravine, they realised that he had somehow managed
to survive, and that his removal in one way or another would be necessary. Then had followed
an armed searching party, whose purpose (whatever it may have been originally) became that of
a sheriff’s posse after one of the seldom popular state troopers had by accident observed,
then questioned, and finally joined the seekers.
On the third day Slater was found unconscious in the hollow of a tree, and
taken to the nearest gaol; where alienists from Albany examined him as soon as his senses returned.
To them he told a simple story. He had, he said, gone to sleep one afternoon about sundown after
drinking much liquor. He had awaked to find himself standing bloody-handed in the snow before
his cabin, the mangled corpse of his neighbour Peter Slader at his feet. Horrified, he had taken
to the woods in a vague effort to escape from the scene of what must have been his crime. Beyond
these things he seemed to know nothing, nor could the expert questioning of his interrogators
bring out a single additional fact. That night Slater slept quietly, and the next morning he
wakened with no singular feature save a certain alteration of expression. Dr. Barnard, who had
been watching the patient, thought he noticed in the pale blue eyes a certain gleam of peculiar
quality; and in the flaccid lips an all but imperceptible tightening, as if of intelligent determination.
But when questioned, Slater relapsed into the habitual vacancy of the mountaineer, and only
reiterated what he had said on the preceding day.
On the third morning occurred the first of the man’s mental attacks.
After some show of uneasiness in sleep, he burst forth into a frenzy so powerful that the combined
efforts of four men were needed to bind him in a strait-jacket. The alienists listened with
keen attention to his words, since their curiosity had been aroused to a high pitch by the suggestive
yet mostly conflicting and incoherent stories of his family and neighbours. Slater raved for
upward of fifteen minutes, babbling in his backwoods dialect of great edifices of light, oceans
of space, strange music, and shadowy mountains and valleys. But most of all did he dwell upon
some mysterious blazing entity that shook and laughed and mocked at him. This vast, vague personality
seemed to have done him a terrible wrong, and to kill it in triumphant revenge was his paramount
desire. In order to reach it, he said, he would soar through abysses of emptiness, burning
every obstacle that stood in his way. Thus ran his discourse, until with the greatest suddenness
he ceased. The fire of madness died from his eyes, and in dull wonder he looked at his questioners
and asked why he was bound. Dr. Barnard unbuckled the leathern harness and did not restore it
till night, when he succeeded in persuading Slater to don it of his own volition, for his own
good. The man had now admitted that he sometimes talked queerly, though he knew not why.
Within a week two more attacks appeared, but from them the doctors learned
little. On the source of Slater’s visions they speculated at length, for since
he could neither read nor write, and had apparently never heard a legend or fairy tale, his
gorgeous imagery was quite inexplicable. That it could not come from any known myth or romance
was made especially clear by the fact that the unfortunate lunatic expressed himself only in
his own simple manner. He raved of things he did not understand and could not interpret; things
which he claimed to have experienced, but which he could not have learned through any normal
or connected narration. The alienists soon agreed that abnormal dreams were the foundation of
the trouble; dreams whose vividness could for a time completely dominate the waking mind of
this basically inferior man. With due formality Slater was tried for murder, acquitted on the
ground of insanity, and committed to the institution wherein I held so humble a post.
I have said that I am a constant speculator concerning dream life, and from
this you may judge of the eagerness with which I applied myself to the study of the new patient
as soon as I had fully ascertained the facts of his case. He seemed to sense a certain friendliness
in me; born no doubt of the interest I could not conceal, and the gentle manner in which I questioned
him. Not that he ever recognised me during his attacks, when I hung breathlessly upon his chaotic
but cosmic word-pictures; but he knew me in his quiet hours, when he would sit by his barred
window weaving baskets of straw and willow, and perhaps pining for the mountain freedom he could
never enjoy again. His family never called to see him; probably it had found another temporary
head, after the manner of decadent mountain folk.
By degrees I commenced to feel an overwhelming wonder at the mad and fantastic
conceptions of Joe Slater. The man himself was pitiably inferior in mentality and language alike;
but his glowing, titanic visions, though described in a barbarous and disjointed jargon, were
assuredly things which only a superior or even exceptional brain could conceive. How, I often
asked myself, could the stolid imagination of a Catskill degenerate conjure up sights whose
very possession argued a lurking spark of genius? How could any backwoods dullard have gained
so much as an idea of those glittering realms of supernal radiance and space about which Slater
ranted in his furious delirium? More and more I inclined to the belief that in the pitiful personality
who cringed before me lay the disordered nucleus of something beyond my comprehension; something
infinitely beyond the comprehension of my more experienced but less imaginative medical and
scientific colleagues.
And yet I could extract nothing definite from the man. The sum of all my investigation
was, that in a kind of semi-uncorporeal dream life Slater wandered or floated through resplendent
and prodigious valleys, meadows, gardens, cities, and palaces of light; in a region unbounded
and unknown to man. That there he was no peasant or degenerate, but a creature of importance
and vivid life; moving proudly and dominantly, and checked only by a certain deadly enemy, who
seemed to be a being of visible yet ethereal structure, and who did not appear to be of human
shape, since Slater never referred to it as a man, or as aught save a thing. This
thing had done Slater some hideous but unnamed wrong, which the maniac (if maniac he
were) yearned to avenge. From the manner in which Slater alluded to their dealings, I judged
that he and the luminous thing had met on equal terms; that in his dream existence the
man was himself a luminous thing of the same race as his enemy. This impression was sustained
by his frequent references to flying through space and burning all that impeded
his progress. Yet these conceptions were formulated in rustic words wholly inadequate to convey
them, a circumstance which drove me to the conclusion that if a true dream-world indeed existed,
oral language was not its medium for the transmission of thought. Could it be that the dream-soul
inhabiting this inferior body was desperately struggling to speak things which the simple and
halting tongue of dulness could not utter? Could it be that I was face to face with intellectual
emanations which would explain the mystery if I could but learn to discover and read them? I
did not tell the older physicians of these things, for middle age is sceptical, cynical, and
disinclined to accept new ideas. Besides, the head of the institution had but lately warned
me in his paternal way that I was overworking; that my mind needed a rest.
It had long been my belief that human thought consists basically of atomic
or molecular motion, convertible into ether waves of radiant energy like heat, light, and electricity.
This belief had early led me to contemplate the possibility of telepathy or mental communication
by means of suitable apparatus, and I had in my college days prepared a set of transmitting
and receiving instruments somewhat similar to the cumbrous devices employed in wireless telegraphy
at that crude, pre-radio period. These I had tested with a fellow-student; but achieving no
result, had soon packed them away with other scientific odds and ends for possible future use.
Now, in my intense desire to probe into the dream life of Joe Slater, I sought these instruments
again; and spent several days in repairing them for action. When they were complete once more
I missed no opportunity for their trial. At each outburst of Slater’s violence, I would
fit the transmitter to his forehead and the receiver to my own; constantly making delicate adjustments
for various hypothetical wave-lengths of intellectual energy. I had but little notion of how
the thought-impressions would, if successfully conveyed, arouse an intelligent response in my
brain; but I felt certain that I could detect and interpret them. Accordingly I continued my
experiments, though informing no one of their nature.


It was on the twenty-first of February, 1901, that the thing finally occurred. As I look back
across the years I realise how unreal it seems; and sometimes half wonder if old Dr. Fenton
was not right when he charged it all to my excited imagination. I recall that he listened with
great kindness and patience when I told him, but afterward gave me a nerve-powder and arranged
for the half-year’s vacation on which I departed the next week. That fateful night I was
wildly agitated and perturbed, for despite the excellent care he had received, Joe Slater was
unmistakably dying. Perhaps it was his mountain freedom that he missed, or perhaps the turmoil
in his brain had grown too acute for his rather sluggish physique; but at all events the flame
of vitality flickered low in the decadent body. He was drowsy near the end, and as darkness
fell he dropped off into a troubled sleep. I did not strap on the strait-jacket as was customary
when he slept, since I saw that he was too feeble to be dangerous, even if he woke in mental
disorder once more before passing away. But I did place upon his head and mine the two ends
of my cosmic “radio”; hoping against hope for a first and last message from the
dream-world in the brief time remaining. In the cell with us was one nurse, a mediocre fellow
who did not understand the purpose of the apparatus, or think to inquire into my course. As
the hours wore on I saw his head droop awkwardly in sleep, but I did not disturb him. I myself,
lulled by the rhythmical breathing of the healthy and the dying man, must have nodded a little
later.
The sound of weird lyric melody was what aroused me. Chords, vibrations, and
harmonic ecstasies echoed passionately on every hand; while on my ravished sight burst the stupendous
spectacle of ultimate beauty. Walls, columns, and architraves of living fire blazed effulgently
around the spot where I seemed to float in air; extending upward to an infinitely high vaulted
dome of indescribable splendour. Blending with this display of palatial magnificence, or rather,
supplanting it at times in kaleidoscopic rotation, were glimpses of wide plains and graceful
valleys, high mountains and inviting grottoes; covered with every lovely attribute of scenery
which my delighted eye could conceive of, yet formed wholly of some glowing, ethereal, plastic
entity, which in consistency partook as much of spirit as of matter. As I gazed, I perceived
that my own brain held the key to these enchanting metamorphoses; for each vista which appeared
to me, was the one my changing mind most wished to behold. Amidst this elysian realm I dwelt
not as a stranger, for each sight and sound was familiar to me; just as it had been for uncounted
aeons of eternity before, and would be for like eternities to come.
Then the resplendent aura of my brother of light drew near and held colloquy
with me, soul to soul, with silent and perfect interchange of thought. The hour was one of approaching
triumph, for was not my fellow-being escaping at last from a degrading periodic bondage; escaping
forever, and preparing to follow the accursed oppressor even unto the uttermost fields of ether,
that upon it might be wrought a flaming cosmic vengeance which would shake the spheres? We floated
thus for a little time, when I perceived a slight blurring and fading of the objects around
us, as though some force were recalling me to earth—where I least wished to go. The form
near me seemed to feel a change also, for it gradually brought its discourse toward a conclusion,
and itself prepared to quit the scene; fading from my sight at a rate somewhat less rapid than
that of the other objects. A few more thoughts were exchanged, and I knew that the luminous
one and I were being recalled to bondage, though for my brother of light it would be the last
time. The sorry planet-shell being well-nigh spent, in less than an hour my fellow would be
free to pursue the oppressor along the Milky Way and past the hither stars to the very confines
of infinity.
A well-defined shock separates my final impression of the fading scene of light
from my sudden and somewhat shamefaced awakening and straightening up in my chair as I saw the
dying figure on the couch move hesitantly. Joe Slater was indeed awaking, though probably for
the last time. As I looked more closely, I saw that in the sallow cheeks shone spots of colour
which had never before been present. The lips, too, seemed unusual; being tightly compressed,
as if by the force of a stronger character than had been Slater’s. The whole face finally
began to grow tense, and the head turned restlessly with closed eyes. I did not arouse the sleeping
nurse, but readjusted the slightly disarranged head-bands of my telepathic “radio”,
intent to catch any parting message the dreamer might have to deliver. All at once the head
turned sharply in my direction and the eyes fell open, causing me to stare in blank amazement
at what I beheld. The man who had been Joe Slater, the Catskill decadent, was now gazing at
me with a pair of luminous, expanded eyes whose blue seemed subtly to have deepened. Neither
mania nor degeneracy was visible in that gaze, and I felt beyond a doubt that I was viewing
a face behind which lay an active mind of high order.
At this juncture my brain became aware of a steady external influence operating
upon it. I closed my eyes to concentrate my thoughts more profoundly, and was rewarded by the
positive knowledge that my long-sought mental message had come at last. Each transmitted
idea formed rapidly in my mind, and though no actual language was employed, my habitual association
of conception and expression was so great that I seemed to be receiving the message in ordinary
English.
“Joe Slater is dead,” came the soul-petrifying voice or
agency from beyond the wall of sleep. My opened eyes sought the couch of pain in curious horror,
but the blue eyes were still calmly gazing, and the countenance was still intelligently animated.
“He is better dead, for he was unfit to bear the active intellect of cosmic entity. His
gross body could not undergo the needed adjustments between ethereal life and planet life. He
was too much of an animal, too little a man; yet it is through his deficiency that you have
come to discover me, for the cosmic and planet souls rightly should never meet. He has been
my torment and diurnal prison for forty-two of your terrestrial years. I am an entity like that
which you yourself become in the freedom of dreamless sleep. I am your brother of light, and
have floated with you in the effulgent valleys. It is not permitted me to tell your waking earth-self
of your real self, but we are all roamers of vast spaces and travellers in many ages. Next year
I may be dwelling in the dark Egypt which you call ancient, or in the cruel empire of Tsan-Chan
which is to come three thousand years hence. You and I have drifted to the worlds that reel
about the red Arcturus, and dwelt in the bodies of the insect-philosophers that crawl proudly
over the fourth moon of Jupiter. How little does the earth-self know of life and its extent!
How little, indeed, ought it to know for its own tranquillity! Of the oppressor I cannot speak.
You on earth have unwittingly felt its distant presence—you who without knowing idly gave
to its blinking beacon the name of Algol, the Daemon-Star. It is to meet and conquer
the oppressor that I have vainly striven for aeons, held back by bodily encumbrances. Tonight
I go as a Nemesis bearing just and blazingly cataclysmic vengeance. Watch me in the sky close
by the Daemon-Star. I cannot speak longer, for the body of Joe Slater grows cold and rigid,
and the coarse brains are ceasing to vibrate as I wish. You have been my friend in the cosmos;
you have been my only friend on this planet—the only soul to sense and seek for me within
the repellent form which lies on this couch. We shall meet again—perhaps in the shining
mists of Orion’s Sword, perhaps on a bleak plateau in prehistoric Asia. Perhaps in unremembered
dreams tonight; perhaps in some other form an aeon hence, when the solar system shall have been
swept away.”
At this point the thought-waves abruptly ceased, and the pale eyes of the dreamer—or
can I say dead man?—commenced to glaze fishily. In a half-stupor I crossed over to the
couch and felt of his wrist, but found it cold, stiff, and pulseless. The sallow cheeks paled
again, and the thick lips fell open, disclosing the repulsively rotten fangs of the degenerate
Joe Slater. I shivered, pulled a blanket over the hideous face, and awakened the nurse. Then
I left the cell and went silently to my room. I had an insistent and unaccountable craving for
a sleep whose dreams I should not remember.
The climax? What plain tale of science can boast of such a rhetorical effect?
I have merely set down certain things appealing to me as facts, allowing you to construe them
as you will. As I have already admitted, my superior, old Dr. Fenton, denies the reality of
everything I have related. He vows that I was broken down with nervous strain, and badly in
need of the long vacation on full pay which he so generously gave me. He assures me on his professional
honour that Joe Slater was but a low-grade paranoiac, whose fantastic notions must have come
from the crude hereditary folk-tales which circulate in even the most decadent of communities.
All this he tells me—yet I cannot forget what I saw in the sky on the night after Slater
died. Lest you think me a biassed witness, another’s pen must add this final testimony,
which may perhaps supply the climax you expect. I will quote the following account of the star
Nova Persei verbatim from the pages of that eminent astronomical authority, Prof. Garrett
P. Serviss:

“On February 22, 1901, a marvellous new star was discovered by Dr. Anderson,
of Edinburgh, not very far from Algol. No star had been visible at that point before.
Within twenty-four hours the stranger had become so bright that it outshone Capella. In a week
or two it had visibly faded, and in the course of a few months it was hardly discernible with
the naked eye.”
